# 18. Conversion and Regeneration

The change which is consummated by immersion, is sometimes called in sacred style, "*being quickened,*" or "*made alive,*" "*passing from death to life,*" "*being born again,*" "*having risen with Christ,*" "*turning  to  the  Lord,*"  "*being  enlightened,*"  "*conversion,*" "*reconciliation,*"  "*repentance  unto  life.*"  These,  like  the  words propitiation,  atonement,  reconciliation,  expiation,  redemption, expressive  of  the  various  aspects  which  the  death  of  Christ sustains, are expressive of the different relations in which this great change, sometimes called a "new creation," may be contemplated. The entire change effected in man by the Christian system, consists in four things: — a change of views; a change of affections; a change of state; and a change of life. Now, in respect of each of these separately or in combination, it is called by different names. As a change of *views,* it is called "being enlightened;" "Once you were darkness, now you are light in the Lord; walk as children of the light;" "After that you were enlightened," etc. As a change of the *affections,* it is called "being reconciled;" thus, "for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved through his life." As a change of *state,* it is called "being quickened;" "passing from death to life," "being born again," "having risen with Christ," "And you *hath he quickened* who were dead in trespasses and sins," "By this we know we have *passed from death to life,* because we love the  brethren,"  "Being  *born  again,*  not  of  corruptible,  but  of incorruptible  seed,  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth forever." "If you be," or "since you *are risen with Christ,* set your affections  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth."  As  a change of *life* it is called "repentance unto life," "turning to the Lord,"  "conversion;"  "Then  God  has  granted  to  the  Gentiles repentance to life." "And all that dwelt in Lydda and Saron saw Eneas  and  *turned  to  the  Lord.*"  "Except  you  be  converted,  and become as children, you shall not enter the kingdom of heaven." "When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren."  "He  that converts a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and hide a multitude of sins." 

Great confusion has been introduced into the Christian community by a confounding of these terms, making only one of them to mean all the others. Witness the controversy about *regeneration;* as if that word were used in sacred Scripture in reference to the entire change  effected  by  the  Christian  system;  whereas,  in  strict propriety, it is never used by itself in the Bible to represent any part of this change, much less the whole of it. We have the phrase "*washing  of  regeneration*"  once,  in  contradistinction  from  the "renewal of the Holy Spirit," (Titus 3:5) but never, by itself, as indicative  of  this  four-fold  change.  But  suppose  it  should  be conceded, that the term *regeneration* might be just equivalent to "*being born again,*" it could even then only represent so much of this change as respects mere *state:* for the figure of a new birth applies merely to admission into a family or nation; and not to the process of quickening or making alive of the person so admitted. It can, then, in strict propriety, only apply to the fourth part of that change which the gospel of salvation proposes and effects. Being *born again* is, or may be the *effect* of a change of views, of a change of affections; or it may be the *cause* of a change of life; but certain it is, it is not identical with any of them, and never can represent them all. 

But may it not include them all? It is impossible: for however we might  extend the figure and suppose it to  include its causes, it cannot also include its  effects.  If it should include a change of views,  a  change  of  affections,  and  a  change  of  state,  it  cannot include a change of life, or of character. We ought then to use this word in its strict and scriptural acceptance, if we would escape the great confusion now resting upon this subject. The sophistry or delusion of this confusion is, that making *regeneration* equivalent to  the  entire  change  instead  of  to  be  one-fourth  part  of  it,  the community will always be imposed on and misled by seeking to find the attributes of conversion in the new birth, or of the new birth in conversion; and so of all the others. Being born again is not *conversion,* nor a *change of views,* nor a *change of affections,* but a *change of state.* True, indeed, that of the person who is born again we may suppose a change of views, a change of heart, and we may infer  a  change  of  character,  and  may  therefore  say  he  is enlightened, renewed in heart, converted as well as born again; but this license respecting the *person,* the subject of the change, is not allowed in talking of the *change* itself. A Christian is, indeed, one whose  views  are  enlightened,  whose  heart  is  renewed,  whose relations to God and the moral universe are changed, and whose manner of life is according to righteousness and true holiness.
