# 23. Summary of the Christian System of Facts

God alone is self-existent and eternal. Before earth and time were born he operated by his **Word** and his **Spirit**. **God, the** **Word of** **God**, and  **the** **Spirit  of**  **God**, participants  of one and the same nature,  are  the  foundations  of  *Nature,  Providence,*  and *Redemption.* In *Nature* and *Providence,* it is **God**, the **Word**, and the **Spirit**. In *Grace,* it is the **Father**, the **Son**, and the **Holy** **Spirit**. All creations, providences, and remedial arrangements display to us  the  co-operation  of  **three  divine  participants**,  of  one self-existent,  independent,  incommunicable  nature.  These  are fundamental conceptions of all the revelations and developments of the Divinity, and necessary to all rational and sanctifying views of religion.

In the *Law* and in the *Gospel* these sacred and mysterious relations and personal manifestations of God are presupposed and assumed as the basis of the whole procedure. "God created *all things* by Jesus Christ, and for him." "The Word was in the beginning with God," "before all things," and "by him all things consist." "God created man upright." Man sinned: all became mortal: our nature became susceptible of evil. It is in this respect fallen and depraved. "There is none righteous — no, not one." God the Father has chosen men in Christ to salvation "through the sanctification of the Spirit unto  obedience,  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus;"  and "promised,"  to  such,  "eternal  life  before  the  foundation  of the world."

Therefore, in "the fulness of time" — "in *due* time, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman" — for "the **Word** became flesh, and dwelt among  us;  and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  an  only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." "He showed us the Father." He died as a sin-offering — was buried, rose again the third day — ascended to heaven — presented his offering in the true Holy Place — made expiation for our sins — "forever sat down on the right hand of the Supreme Majesty in the heavens" — sent down his Holy Spirit — inspired his Apostles, who "preached with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven" — persuaded many Jews and Gentiles that he was made "the author of an eternal salvation to all who obeyed him."  He  commanded  faith,  repentance,  and  baptism  to  be preached in his name for remission of sins to every nation and people under heaven.

All who "believe in him are justified from all things;" because this faith is living, active, operative, and perfected by "obeying from the  heart  that  mould  of  doctrine  delivered  to  us."  Hence  such persons repent of their sins, and obey the gospel. They receive the Spirit of God, and the promise of eternal life — walk in the Spirit, and are sanctified to God, and constituted heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ. They shall be raised from the dead incorruptible, immortal, and shall live forever with the Lord; while those "who know not God, and obey not the gospel of his Son, shall perish with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power."
