# Preface to the Second Edition

**The** present edition replaces, for the first part of the last, a series of essays on the Christian System; and somewhat expands on the second. The continual misrepresentation and misunderstanding of our views on some very fundamental points of the Christian system seem at this critical moment to call for a very definite, clear, and connected presentation of the great outlines and elements of the Christian Institution; especially with reference to a major question, which we expect soon to be the all-consuming issue of Protestant Christendom, namely — *How can divisions end, and all Christians unite, harmonize, and cooperate in one great community, as at the beginning?*

Church matters are moving toward a new outcome. The Christian system is undergoing an examination today, both regarding its evidence and meaning, wholly unprecedented since the days of the great falling away. Such a time is always a time of extremes: but things will regulate themselves and settle on the true foundation. "Many are running to and fro;" and certainly knowledge is increasing.

The Christian system, as presented in the following essays, would, except for the special essays on the "Kingdom of Heaven," "Remission of Sins," "Regeneration," and "Breaking the Loaf," have been more systematically and fully developed. Several points are only briefly discussed in the new essays because they recur in those detailed articles which have been published so often. We have, indeed, aimed first at giving a general overview, leaving the important details on the most debated points for those essays.

Instead of the "Dialogue on the Holy Spirit," so widely read and thoroughly discussed, we have added a few essays on **Church Order** as part of the Christian system: thus trying to give the book every chance of being as useful as possible to those who desire a more complete understanding of our progress in Christian knowledge. We speak for ourselves only; and while we are always willing to declare our faith and understanding of the Christian system, we firmly protest against dogmatically presenting our own views, or those of any fallible person, as a condition or foundation of church unity and cooperation. While, then, we would, if we could, either by word or writing, proclaim all that we believe and all that we know to the ends of the earth, *we take the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible, as the foundation of all Christian unity and fellowship.* Those who do not like this are welcome to show us a better way.

A. CAMPBELL.

**BETHANY**, Va. June 13th, 1839.