***Proposition 6 – The breaking of the loaf and the      drinking of the cup are commemorative of the Lord's death.*** 

Upon the loaf and upon the cup of the Lord, in letters which speak not  to  the  eye,  but  to  the  heart  of  every  disciple,  is  inscribed, "*When this you see, remember me.*" Indeed, the Lord says to each disciple, when he receives the symbols into his hand, 'This is my body broken for *you.* This is my blood shed for *you.*' The loaf is thus  constituted  a  representation  of  his  body — first  whole,  then wounded for our sins. The cup is thus instituted a representation of his blood — once his life, but now poured out to cleanse us from our sins. To every disciple he says, For *you* my body was wounded; for *you* my life was taken. In receiving it the disciple says, "Lord, I believe it. My life sprung from thy suffering;  my joy from thy sorrows; and my hope of glory everlasting from thy humiliation and  abasement  even  to  death."  Each  disciple,  in  handing  the symbols to his fellow-disciple, says, in effect, "You, my brother, once an alien, are now a citizen of heaven; once a stranger, are now brought home to the family of God. You have owned my Lord as your Lord, my people as your people. Under Jesus the Messiah we are one. Mutually embraced in the everlasting arms, I embrace you in mine: thy sorrows shall be my sorrows, and thy joys my joys. Joint debtors to the favor of God and the love of Jesus, we shall jointly suffer with him, that we may jointly reign with him. Let us, then, renew our strength, remember our King, and hold fast our boasted hope unshaken to the end." 

- Blest be the tie that binds  

`  `Our hearts in Christian love;  

`  `The fellowship of kindred minds    Is like to that above."  

` `Here  he  knows  no  man  after  the  flesh.  Ties  that  spring  from eternal love, revealed in blood, and addressed to his senses, draw forth all that is within him of complacent affection and feeling, to those joint heirs with him of the grace of eternal life. While it represents to him '*the bread of life*' — all the salvation of the Lord — it is the strength of his faith, the joy of his hope, and the life of his love.13

This  institution  commemorates  the  love  which  reconciled  us  to God, and always furnishes us with a new argument to live for him who died for us. Him who feels not the eloquence and power of this argument, all other arguments assail in vain. God's goodness, developed in creation and in his providence, is well designed to lead men to reformation. But the heart, on which these fail, and to which  Calvary  appeals  in  vain,  is  past  feeling,  obdurate,  and irreclaimable, beyond the operation of any moral power known to mortal man. 

Every time the disciples assemble around the Lord's table, they are furnished with a new argument also against sin, as well as with a new proof of the love of God. It is as well intended to crucify the world in our hearts, as to quicken us to God, and to diffuse his love within us. Hence it must in reason be a stated part of the Christian worship,  in  all  Christian  assemblies;  which  leads  us  to  state, illustrate, and sustain the following capital proposition, to which the preceding six are all preliminary. 

