***Proposition 7 – The breaking of the one loaf, and the    joint participation of the cup of the Lord, in             commemoration of the Lord's death, usually called "the Lord's Supper," is an instituted part of the worship and edification of all Christian congregations in all their    stated meetings.*** 

***Argument*  1**.  The  first  Christian  congregation  which  met  in Jerusalem, and which was constituted by the twelve Apostles, did as  statedly  attend  upon  the  breaking  of  the  loaf  in  their  public meetings, as they did upon any other part of the Christian worship. So  Luke  records,  Acts  2:42.  'They  continued  steadfast  in  the Apostles' doctrine, in the fellowship, in *the breaking of the loaf,* and in the prayers.' Ought we not, then, to continue as steadfast in the breaking of the loaf, as in the teaching of the Apostles, as in the fellowship, as in the prayers commanded by the Apostles? 

***Argument* 2**. The Apostles taught the churches to do all the Lord commanded. Whatever, then, the churches did by the appointment or concurrence of the Apostles, they did by the commandment of Jesus  Christ.  Whatever  acts  of  religious  worship  the  Apostles taught and sanctioned in one Christian congregation, they taught and sanctioned in all Christian congregations, because all under the same government of one and the same King. But the church in Troas met upon the first  day of the week, consequently all the churches met upon the first day of the week for religious purposes. 

Among  the  acts  of  worship,  or  the  institutions  of  the  Lord,  to which the disciples attended in these meetings, the breaking of the loaf was so conspicuous and so important, that the churches are said to meet on the first day of the week for this purpose. We are expressly told that the disciples at Troas met for this purpose; and what one church did by the authority of the Lord, as a part of his instituted worship, they all did. That the disciples in Troas met for this purpose is not to be inferred; for Luke says positively, Acts 20:7.) 'And on the first day of the week, when the disciples came together for the breaking of the loaf, Paul, being about to depart on the  morrow,  discoursed  with  them,  and  lengthened  out  his discourse till midnight.' From the manner in which this meeting of the disciples at Troas is mentioned by the historian, two things are very obvious — 1st. That it was an established custom or rule for the disciples to meet on the first day of the week. 2d. That the primary object of their meeting was to break the loaf. They who object to breaking the loaf on the first day of every week when the disciples are assembled, usually preface their objections by telling us, that Luke does not say they broke the loaf *every* first day; and yet they contend against the Sabbatarians, that they ought to observe *every* first day to the Lord in commemoration of his resurrection. The Sabbatarians  raise  the  same  objection  to  this  passage,  when adduced by all professors of Christianity to authorize the weekly observance of the first day. They say that Luke does not tell us, that they met for any religious purpose on *every* first day. How inconsistent,  then,  are  they  who  make  this  sentence  an  express precedent for observing *every* first day, when arguing against the Sabbatarians, and then turn round and tell us, that it will not prove that they broke the loaf *every* first day! If it does not prove the one, it  is  most  obvious  it  will  not  prove  the  other;  for  the  weekly observance of this day, as a day of the meeting of the disciples, and the weekly breaking of the loaf in those meetings, stand or fall together. Hear it again: 'And on the first day of the week, when the disciples assembled to break the loaf.' Now all must confess, who regard the meaning of words, that the meeting of the disciples and the breaking of the loaf, as far as these words are concerned, are expressed in the same terms as respects the frequency. If the one was *fifty-two* times in a year, or only *once;* so was the other. If they met every first day, they broke the loaf every first day; and if they did not break the loaf every first day, they did not meet every first day. But we argue from the style of Luke, or from his manner of 

The definite article is,  in  the Greek and in  the English tongue, prefixed to stated fixed times, and its appearance here is not merely definitive of one day, but expressive of a stated or fixed day. This is so in all languages which have a definite article. Let us illustrate this by a very parallel and plain case. Suppose some 500 or 1000 years hence the annual observance of the 4th of July should have ceased  for  several  centuries,  and  that  some  person  or  persons devoted to the primitive institutions of this mighty Republic, were desirous of seeing the 4th of every July observed as did the fathers and founders of the Republic during the hale  and undegenerate days of primitive republican simplicity. Suppose that none of the records of the first century of this Republic had expressly stated, that it was a regular and fixed custom for a certain class of citizens to pay a particular regard to the 4th day of every July; but that a few incidental expressions in the biography of the leading men in the Republic spoke of it as Luke has done of the meeting at Troas. How would it be managed? For instance, in the life of John Quincy Adams it is written, A. D. 1823, "And on the 4th of July, when the republicans of the city of Washington met to dine, John Q. Adams delivered an oration to them." Would not an American, a thousand years hence, in circumstances such as have been stated, find in these words *one* evidence that it was an established usage, during the  first  century  of  this  Republic,  to  regard  the  4th  of  July  as aforesaid. He would tell his opponents to mark, that it was not said that on *a* fourth of July, as if it were a particular occurrence; but it was, in the fixed meaning of the English language expressive of a fixed and stated day of peculiar observance. At all events, he could not fail in convincing the most stupid, that the primary intention of that meeting was *to dine.* Whatever might be the frequency or the intention  of  that  dinner,  it  must  be  confessed,  from  the  words 

above cited, that they *met to dine.* 

Another  circumstance  that  must  somewhat  confound  the Sabbatarians, and the lawless observers of the breaking of the loaf, may  be  easily  gathered  from  Luke's  narrative.  Paul  and  his company arrived at Troas either on the evening of the first day, or on Monday morning at an early hour; for he departed on Monday morning, as we term it, at an early hour; and we are positively told that he tarried just seven days at Troas. Now, had the disciples been Sabbatarians, or observed the seventh day as a Sabbath, and broke the loaf on it as the Sabbatarians do, they would not have deferred  their  meeting  till  the  first  day,  and  kept  Paul  and  his company waiting, as he was evidently in a great haste at this time. But his tarrying *seven* days, and his early departure on Monday morning, corroborates the evidence adduced in proof, that the first day of the week was the *fixed* and *stated* day, for the disciples to meet for this purpose.14

From the 2d of the Acts, then, we learn that *the breaking of the loaf,*  was  a  stated  part  of  the  worship  of  the  disciples  in  their meetings; and from the 20th we learn, that the first day of the week was the stated time for those meetings; and above all, we ought to notice that the most prominent object of their meeting was to break the loaf. Other corroborating evidences of the stated meeting of the disciples on the first day for religious purposes, are found in the fact, that Paul says he had given order to all the congregations in Galatia, as well as that in Corinth, to attend to the fellowship, or the laying up of contributions for the poor saints on the first day of every week. 'On the first day of *every week* let each of you lay somewhat by itself, according as he may have prospered, putting it into the treasury, that when I come there may be no collections'15

for the saints. *Kata mian Sabbaton* Macknight justly renders, '*the first day of  every week;*' for  every linguist will admit  that  *kata polin* means every city; *kata menan,* every month; *kata ecclesian,* every  church;  and,  therefore,  in  the  same  usage,  *kata  mian Sabbaton* means the first day of every week. 

Now this prepares the way for asserting not only, that the disciples in Troas assembled on the first day of every week for 'the breaking of the loaf,' but also for adducing a third argument: —  

***Argument* 3**. The congregation in Corinth met every first day, or the first day of every week, for showing forth the Lord's death. Let the reader bear in mind that he has just heard that Paul commanded the  church  in  Corinth,  or  every  saint  in  Corinth,  to  contribute according to his ability, by putting into the treasury every first day his  contributions  to  avoid  collections  when  Paul  came.  This  is agreed on all hands  to  prove the weekly meeting of the saints. Now, with this concession in mind, we have only to notice what is said, chap. 11: 20. 'When you come together in one place, that is, every week at least, *this is not to eat the Lord's supper.*' To act thus is unworthy of the object of your meeting. To act thus is not to eat the Lord's supper. It is not to show forth the Lord's death. Thereby declaring that this is the chief object of meeting. When a teacher reproves his pupils for wasting time, he cannot remind them more forcibly of the object of coming to school, nor reprove them with more point, than to say, 'When you act thus, this is not to assemble to learn.' This is the exact import of the Apostle's address, 'When you assemble thus, it is *not* to eat the Lord's supper.' We have seen, then, that the saints met every first day in Corinth; and when they assembled  in  one  place  it  was  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper,  a declaration  of  the  practice  of  the  primitive  congregations  as explicit as could incidentally be given, differing only from a direct command in the form in which it is expressed. But it is agreed on all  hands,  that  whatsoever  the  congregations  did  with  the approbation of the Apostles, they did by their authority. For the Apostles  gave  them  all  the  Christian  institutions.  Now  as  the Apostle  Paul  approbated  their  meeting  every  week,  and  their coming  together  into  one  place  to  show  forth  the  Lord's death; — and only censured their departure from the meaning of the institution,  it  is  as  high  authority  as  we  could  require  for  the practice of the weekly meeting of the disciples. 

But when Acts 2:42; Acts 20:7. 1 Cor. 11:20 and chap. 16: 1 & 2, are compared and added together, it appears that we act under the influence of apostolic teaching and precedent, when we meet every Lord's day  for the breaking of the loaf. But this is  still farther demonstrated  by  a  fourth  argument  drawn  from  the  following fact: —  

***Argument* 4**. *No example can be adduced from the New Testament of any Christian congregation assembling on the first day of the week,  unless  for  the  breaking  of  the  loaf.*  Let  an  example  be adduced by those who teach that Christians ought to meet on the first day of the week not to break the loaf, and then, but not till then, can they impugn the above fact. Till this is done, a denial of it  must  appear  futile  in  the  extreme.  The  argument,  then,  is, Christians have no authority, nor are under any obligations to meet on  the  Lord's  day,  from  anything  which  the  Apostles  said  or practiced, unless it be to show forth the Lord's death, and to attend to those means of edification and comfort connected with it. 

***Argument* 5**. If it be not the duty and privilege of every Christian congregation to assemble on the first day of every week to show forth the Lord's death, it will be difficult, if not impossible, from either scripture or reason, to show that it is their duty or privilege to meet monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, annually, or indeed, at all, for this purpose. For from what premises can any person show that it is a duty or privilege to assemble monthly, which will not prove  that  it  is  obligatory  to  meet  weekly?  We  challenge investigation here, and affirm that no man can produce a single reason,  why  it  should  or  could  be  a  duty  or  a  privilege  for  a congregation to meet monthly, quarterly, or annually, which will not prove that it is its duty and privilege to assemble every first day for this purpose. 

***Argument*  6**.  Spiritual  health,  as  well  as  corporeal  health,  is dependent on food. It is requisite for corporeal health, that the food not only be salutary in its nature, and sufficient in its quantity, but that it be received at proper intervals, and these regular and fixed. Is it otherwise with moral health? Is there no analogy between the bread which perishes, and the bread of life Is there no analogy between natural and moral life — between natural and moral health? and, if there be, does it not follow, that if the primitive disciples only enjoyed good moral health, when they assembled weekly to show forth the Lord's death, that they cannot enjoy good moral health who only meet quarterly or semi-annually for this purpose? ***Argument* 7**. But in the last place, what *commemorative* institution, in any age, under any religious economy, was ordained by divine authority, which had not a fixed time for its observance? Was it the commemoration of the finishing of creation signified in the weekly Sabbath?  Was  it  the  Passover,  the  Pentecost,  the  Feast  of Tabernacles?  Was  it  the  Feast  of  Purim  either?  What  other significant usage was it, the times or occasion of whose observance were not fixed. How often was circumcision to be administered to the same subject? How often Christian immersion? Is there a single institution commemorative of anything, the meaning, or frequency, of the observance of which, is not distinctly, either by precept or example, laid down in the Holy Scriptures? Not one of a *social* character,  and  scarcely  one  of  an  individual  character.  The commemoration  of  the  Lord's  death  must,  then,  be  a  weekly institution — an institution in all the meetings of the disciples for Christian  worship;  or  it  must  be  an  anomaly — a  thing  *sui generis* — an institution like no other of divine origin. And can any one tell  why Christians  should celebrate the  Lord's resurrection *fifty-two* times in a year, and his death only *once, twice,* or *twelve* times?  He  that  can  do  this  will  not  be  lacking  in  a  lively imagination, however defection he may be in judgment, or in an acquaintance with the New Testament. 

