***Proposition 2 – In the house of God there is always the table of the Lord.*** 

As there is  an analogy  between the Jewish holy  place, and the Christian  house  of  God;  so  there  is  an  analogy  between  the furniture  of  the  first  tabernacle  or  holy  place,  and  those  who officiated in it; and the furniture of the Christian house of God, and those who officiate in it. 'In the first tabernacle, said Paul, which is called  *holy,*  there  were  the  candlestick,  and  the  table,  and  the showbread,'  or  the  loaves  of  the  presence.  On  the  golden  table every  Sabbath  day  were  placed  *twelve*  loaves,  which  were exhibited there for one week, and on the next Sabbath they were substituted  by  twelve  fresh  loaves  sprinkled  over  with frankincense. The loaves which were removed from the table, were eaten by the priests. These were called in the Hebrew, 'the loaves of the faces,' or the loaves of the presence. This emblem of the abundance of spiritual food in the presence of God for all who dwell  in  the  holy  place,  stood  always  upon  the  golden  table furnished by the twelve tribes, even in the wilderness. The light in the first tabernacle was not from *without,* but from the seven lamps placed on the golden candlestick; emblematic of the perfect light not derived from this world, which is enjoyed in the house of God. 

If, then, in the emblematic house of God, to which corresponds the Christian house of God, there was not only a table overlaid with gold, always spread, and on it displayed *twelve large loaves,* or cakes, sacred memorials and emblems of God's bounty and grace; shall we say that in that house, over which Jesus is a Son, there is not to stand always a table more precious than gold, covered with a richer repast for the holy and royal priesthood which the Lord has instituted, who may always enter into the holy place consecrated by himself. 

But we are not dependent on analogies, nor far fetched inferences, for the proof of this position. Paul, who perfectly understood both the Jewish and Christian Institutions, tells us, that there is in the Christian temple a table, appropriately called the Lord's Table, as a part of its furniture. He informs those who were in danger of being polluted by idolatry, 'that they could not be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of demons.'7 In all his allusions to this table in this connection, he represents it as continually approached by those in the Lord's house. 'The cup of the Lord' and 'the loaf,' for which thanks were continually offered, are the  furniture of this table, to which the Christian brotherhood have free access. 

The Apostle Paul reminds the saints in Corinth of their familiarity with the Lord's table, in speaking of it as being common as the meetings of the brotherhood. 'The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not the joint participation of the blood of Christ? The loaf which we break, is it not the joint participation of the body  of  Christ?'  In  this  style  we  speak  of  things  common  and usual, never thus of things uncommon or unusual. It is not the cup which we *have* received with thanks; nor is it the loaf which we *have* broken; but which we *do* break. But all that we aim at here is now accomplished; for it has been shown that, *in the Lord's house there is always the table of the Lord.* It is scarcely necessary to add, that if it be shown, that in the Lord's house there is the Lord's table, as a part of the furniture, it must always be there, unless, it can be shown that only some occasions require its presence, and others its absence; or that the Lord is poorer or more churlish at one time than at another; that he is not always able to keep a table, or  too  parsimonious  to  furnish  it  for  his  friends.  But  this  is  in anticipation of our subject, and we proceed to the third proposition. 

