10. Sacrifice for Sin 

The history of sacrifice is the history of atonement, reconciliation, redemption, and remission of sins. These are not, at least in the Jewish and Christian style, exactly synonymous terms. Sacrifice atones and reconciles. It propitiates God, and reconciles man. It is the cause, and these are its effects on heaven and earth, on God and man. 

For  form's  sake,  and  perhaps,  for  the  sake  of  perspicuity,  four questions ought here to be propounded and resolved, at the very threshold of our inquiries. 1. What *is* sacrifice? 2. *To whom* is it to be offered? 3. *For whom* is it to be offered? 4. *By whom* is it to be offered?  The  answers  are  as  prompt  and  as  brief  as  the interrogations. 1. In its literal primary acceptance, it is "*the solemn and religious infliction of death upon an innocent and unoffending victim, usually by shedding its blood.*" Figuratively, it means the offering of anything, living or dead, person or animal, or property, to God. 2. Religious sacrifice is to be offered to God alone. 3. It is to be offered for man. 4. It is to be offered by a priest. 

The greater part of sacrifices were lambs. Hence Christ is called the **Lamb of** **God**, not because of his innocence or patience, but because "he taketh away," or beareth "the sin of the world." It is rather, then, with a reference to his *death* than to his *life,* that he is called the *Lamb* of God. Neither his *example* nor his *doctrine* could expiate  sin.  This  required  the  shedding  of  blood:  for  without shedding of blood, there never was remission of sin. 

Priests are mediators in their proper place and meaning. But at first every man was his own priest. For as it was once right for a man to marry his sister, because he could find no other person for a wife, so was it lawful and expedient for every man to be his own priest. Thus, Adam, Abel, Noah, etc. were their own priests. In the next chapter of time, the eldest sons — then the princes of tribes, were priests  for  their  respective  tribes  and  people.  But  finally,  God called, and appointed such persons as Melchizedek and Aaron to those offices. 

Sacrifice, doubtless, is as old as the Fall. The institution of it is not recorded by Moses. But he informs us, that God had respect for Abel's offering, and accepted from him a *slain lamb.* Now had it been a human institution, this could not have been the case for a divine  warrant  has  always  been  essential  to  any  acceptable worship.  The question, "Who has  required this at  your hands?" must always be answered by a "*Thus saith the Lord,*" before an offering of mortal man can be acknowledged by the Lawgiver of the universe. "In vain," said the Great Teacher, "do you worship God,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of  men."  God accepted the sacrifices of Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, etc. and in the Jewish system gave many laws and enactments concerning it. 

Now  as  sacrifice  may  be  contemplated  in  different  aspects,  in reference to what it is in itself, to whom it is tendered, for whom and by whom it is offered; so in each of these relations, it may be represented under different names. Hence, it is a "*sin offering,*" a 

*thank  offering,*  a  *propitiation,*1  a  *reconciliation,*  a  *redemption.* Contemplated in reference to God, it is a propitiation; in reference to mankind, it is a reconciliation; and in another point of view, it may even be regarded as a redemption or ransom. On each of these it may be expedient to make a few remarks. 

Sacrifice, as respects *God,* is a *propitiation;* as respects *sinners,* it is a *reconciliation;* as respects *sin,* it is an *expiation;* as respects the *saved,* it is a *redemption.* These are aspects of the thing of cardinal value in understanding the Scriptures. As a *propitiation* or atonement2  it  is  offered  to  God;  not,  indeed,  to  move  his benevolence or to excite his mercy, but to render him propitious *according to law and justice.* It sprang from everlasting love, and is the *effect* and not the *cause* of God's benevolence to sinners. But without it God could not be propitious to us. The indignity offered his person, authority, and government, by the rebellion of man, as also  the  good  of  all  his  creatures,  made  it  impossible  for  him, according  to  justice,  eternal  right,  and  his  own  benevolence,  to show mercy without sacrifice. True, indeed, he always does prefer mercy to sacrifice, as he prefers the end to the means. But divine mercy  forever  sits  upon  the  propitiatory;  upon  law  and  justice. Thus  affirms  Paul  of  Jesus,  "Whom  God  has  set  forth  as  a *propitiatory*  through  faith  in  his  blood,  for  a  declaration  of  his justice — that *he might be just,* and *the justifier of the ungodly,* or of him that believeth in Jesus." In this sense only, God could not be gracious  to  man  in  forgiving  him  without  a  propitiation,  or something that could justify him both to himself and all creatures. In this acceptation of the term *atonement,* it is found often in the law, not less than twenty-five times in the single book of Leviticus. 

As respects the sinner, we have said it is a *reconciliation.* Indeed, the  term  reconciliation  very  appropriately  applies  to  sacrifice, inasmuch as it brings forth the offended and the offender together. So far as it honors law and justice, it reconciles God to forgive; and so far as it displays to the offender love and mercy, it reconciles him to his offended Sovereign. It is, in this view, a reconciliation indeed.  It  propitiates  God  and  reconciles  man.  God's  "anger  is turned away;" (not a turbulent passion, not an implacable wrath); but  "*that  moral  sentiment  and  justice,*"  which  demands  the punishment of the violated law, is pacified or well pleased; and man's hatred and animosity against God, is subdued, overcome, and destroyed in and by the same sacrifice. Thus, in fact, it is, in reference to both parties, a reconciliation. Still, however, when we speak  according  to  scriptural  usage,  and  with  proper discrimination,  sacrifice,  as  respects  God,  is  atonement  or propitiation, and as respects man, it is reconciliation. These are its reasons and its effects. "For this cause," says Paul, "Jesus is the mediator  of  a  new  institution,  that  *by  means  of  death  for  the redemption of the transgressions* under the first institution, those who  have  been  called  might  receive  the  promise  of  the  eternal inheritance."3 Again, the same writer makes the death of Christ the 

basis of reconciliation, saying, "Be reconciled to God: for he has made Christ a sin offering for us;" and now "God is in Christ, reconciling the world to himself."4 

As respects sin, it has been observed, sacrifice is an *expiation.* The terms  purification  or  cleansing,  are  in  the  common  version preferred to *expiation.* Once, at least (Num 35:33,) we have a need of a better word to represent the original than the term *cleansing.* "There can be no expiation for the land" polluted with blood, "but by  the  blood  of  him  that  shed  it."  Still,  if  any  one  prefer *purification* to expiation, or even *cleansing* to either, so long as we understand  each  other,  it  is  indeed  a  matter  of  very  easy forbearance. The main point is, that sacrifice cancels sin, atones for sin,  and  puts  it  away.  "*He  put  away  sin,*"  says  Paul,  "*by  the sacrifice of himself.*" This is expiation. 

"The redemption, then, which is in Christ Jesus," is a *moral,* and not a *commercial* consideration. If sin were only a *debt,* and not a *crime,* it might be forgiven without atonement. Nay, if sin were a debt, and sacrifice a payment of that debt, then there could be no forgiveness at all with God! For if the Redeemer or Ransomer of man,  has  paid  the  debt,  justice,  and  not  mercy  or  forgiveness, commands the *release,* not the *pardon* of the debtor. Some there are, however, who from inattention of the sacred style, and the meaning of biblical terms, have actually represented the death of Christ,  rather  as  the  payment  of  an  immense  debt,  than  as  an expiation of sin, or a purification from guilt, and have thus made the  pardon  of  sin  wholly  unintelligible,  or  rather,  indeed, impossible. Every one feels, that when a third person assumes a debt, and pays it, the principal must be discharged, and cannot be forgiven.  But  when  sin  is  viewed  in  the  light  of  a  crime,  and atonement offered by a third person, then it is a question of grace, whether the pardon or acquittal of the sinner shall be granted by him against whom the crime has been committed; because, even after an atonement or propitiation is made, the transgressor is yet as deserving of punishment as before. There is room, then, for both justice and mercy; for the display of indignation against sin, and the  forgiveness  of  the  sinner,  in  just  views  of  sin,  and  of  the redemption there is in and through the Lord Jesus Christ. 

Redemption, however, is the *deliverance from sin,* rather than the expiation  or atonement for it. Thus, Christ is said  "by his  own blood,  to  have  obtained  an  eternal  redemption  for  us."5  Thus 

pardon, sanctification, and even the resurrection of the bodies of the saints, are severally contemplated as parts of our redemption, 

or deliverance from guilt to sin, from the power of sin, and from the punishment of sin.6 

There  is  a  number  of  incongruities  and  inaccuracies  in  the controversy about the nature and extent of the atonement, which, as the mists of the morning retire from the hills before the rising sun,  disappear  from  out  mental  horizon,  when  the  light  of scriptural definition breaks in upon our souls. The atonement or propitiation  has  no "*extent,*" because God alone is  its  object.  It contemplates sin as a unit in the divine government, and therefore the "*Lamb of God* beareth away the sin of the world," and his death is a "*sin offering.*" As to its value, it is unspeakable. Commensurate it is, indeed, with the sin of the world; for it makes it just on the part of God, to forgive and save every one that believeth in Jesus. Reconciliation and redemption, have, however, a certain limited extent.  Reconciliation  is  not  universal,  but  partial.  All  do  not believe in Jesus, all are therefore not reconciled to God through him. Redemption, or deliverance from the guilt, pollution, power, and punishment of sin,  is  only  commensurate  with  the elect  of God, 1: e. with those who believe in Jesus and obey him. 

They who affirm that one drop of Christ's blood could expiate the sin of the whole world, teach without knowing it, that Christ has died in vain: for, surely, the Messiah might have shed many drops of blood and still have lived. They make his death an unmeaning superfluity  or  redundancy,  who  reason  thus.  They  also  agree, without intending it, with those who view sin merely as a debt, and not a crime, and therefore say that there is no need of sin offerings, or sacrifice, or of a divine Savior, in order to its forgiveness. 

They, too, seem to mistake the matter, and I am sorry to find such names among them as Butler, Whitby, and Macknight, who, while they  contend,  that  the  death  of  Christ,  was  a  sacrifice  or  a propitiation  for  sin,  wholly  resolve  its  efficacy  into  the  mere appointment of God. According to them, God might have saved the whole world without the appearance of his Son: for the merits or efficacy of Christ's death arises not from his dignity of person, but from the mere appointment or will of God! Now we cannot think that it was possible for God himself to save sinners in any other way than he has  chosen:  for to  have paid  an  overprice for our redemption, savors rather of prodigality. than of divine wisdom and prudence. And if mere appointment was sufficient, why not, then, have continued the legal sacrifices, and have made the blood of bulls and of goats efficacious to take it away?! 

To  conclude,  sacrifice  is  essential  to  remission  of  sins,  and  is therefore old as the fall of man. But the sacrifices of the patriarchal and Jewish dispensations could not, and did not, take away sin. They were but types of the real sacrifice: for as Paul says, "It was not possible that the blood of bulls and goats could take away sin." And again, "If the blood of bulls, and of goats, with the ashes of a heifer, did cleanse to the purification of the flesh; how much more shall  *the  blood  of  Christ,*  who  through  an  eternal  spirit  offers himself to God, cleanse your conscience from dead works to serve the living God?" Christ's death is, therefore, a real and sufficient sacrifice  for  sin,  and  stands  in  the  attitudes  of  *propitiation, reconciliation, expiation,* and *redemption;* from which spring to us, justification, sanctification, adoption, and eternal life.  

The sacrifice of Christ, as before affirmed, is, as respects God, a propitiation; as respects man, a reconciliation; as respects sin, an expiation; as respects the penitent, a redemption; but the attributes that apply to it in any of these aspects do not apply to it in the others;  and  this  oversight  has  in  our  opinion  been  the  fruitful source of interminable controversies concerning the "atonement," as it is most usually denominated. It is indeed, *infinite* in value, as respects  the  expiation  of  sin,  or  its  propitiatory  power;  but  as respects the actual reconciliation and redemption of sinners, it is limited to those only who believe on and obey the Savior. While, also, it is as universal as the sin of the world, the peculiar sins only of the obedient are expiated by it. Its *design,* then, is necessarily limited to all who come to God by it; while its value and efficacy, are equal to the salvation of the whole world, provided only, they will put themselves under the covering of its propitiatory power. 

The "doctrine of the cross" being the great central doctrine of the Bible, and the very essence of Christianity — which explains all the peculiarities of the Christian system, and of the relation of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, as far as mortals can comprehend them, and as  it  has  been  to  sceptics  and  to  many  professors,  "a  stone  of stumbling, and a rock of offence," for the sake of some of the speculative  and  cavilling,  who  ask  *why  are  these  things  so,*  I subjoin an extract from the writings of Mr. Watson, on this point, which may suggest to them some useful reflections on this cardinal and all absorbing subject: —  

"How sin may be forgiven,” says Mr. Watson, “without leading to such misconceptions of the divine character as would encourage disobedience,  and  thereby  weaken  the  influence  of  the  divine government,  must  be  considered  as  a  problem  of  very  difficult solution. A government which admitted no forgiveness, would sink the guilty in despair; a government which never punishes offence, is a contradiction, it cannot exist. Not to punish the guilty, is to dissolve  authority;  to  punish  without  mercy,  is  to  destroy,  and where all are guilty, to make the destruction universal. That we cannot sin with impunity, is a matter determined. The Ruler of the world is not careless of the conduct of his creatures; for that penal consequences  are  attached  to  the  offence,  is  not  a  subject  of argument, but it is matter of fact, evident by daily observation of the events and circumstances of the present life. It is a principle, therefore, already laid down, that the authority of God must be preserved;  but  it  ought  to  be  remarked,  that  in  that  kind  of administration  which  restrains  evil  by  penalty,  and  encourages obedience by favor and hope, we and all moral creatures are the interested parties, and not  the Divine Governor himself, whom, because  of  his  independent  and  all  sufficient  nature,  our transgressions cannot injure. The reasons, therefore, which compel him to maintain his authority, do not terminate in himself. If he treats offenders with severity, it is for our sake, and for the sake of the moral order of the universe, to which sin, if encouraged by a negligent administration, or by entire and frequent impunity, would be the source of endless disorder and misery; and if the granting of pardon to offence be strongly and even severely guarded, so that no less a satisfaction could be accepted than the death of God's own Son, we are to refer to the moral necessity of the case, as arising out of the general welfare of accountable creatures, liable to the deep evil of sin, and not to any reluctance on the part of our Maker to forgive, much less to anything vindictive in his nature, charges which have been most inconsiderately and unfairly said to be implied in the doctrine of Christ's sacrificial sufferings. If it then  be  true,  that  the  release  of  offending  man  from  future punishment, and his restoration to the divine favor, ought, for the interest of mankind themselves, and for the instruction and caution of other beings, to be so bestowed, that no license shall be given to offence;  that  God  himself,  while  he  manifests  his  compassion, should not appear less just, less holy than he really is; that his authority should be felt to be as compelling, and that disobedience should  as  truly,  though  not  unconditionally,  subject  us  to  the deserved  penalty,  as  though  no  hope  of  forgiveness  had  been exhibited; — we ask, On what scheme, save that which is developed in  the  New  Testament,  are  those  necessary  conditions  provided for? Necessary they are, unless we contend for a license and an impunity which shall annul all good government in the universe, a point for which no reasonable man will contend; and if so, then we must allow, that there is strong internal evidence of the truth of the doctrine  of  Scripture,  when  it  makes  the  offer  of  pardon consequent only upon the securities we have mentioned. If it be said,  that  sin  may  be  pardoned,  in  the  exercise  of  the  divine prerogative, the  reply is, that if this  prerogative were  exercised towards a part of mankind only, the passing by of the rest would be with difficulty reconciled to the Divine character; and if the benefit were extended to all, government, would be at an end. This scheme of bringing men within the exercise of a merciful prerogative, does not, therefore, meet the obvious difficulty of the case; nor is it improved by confining the act of grace only to repentant criminals. For if repentance imply a "renewal in the spirit of the mind," no criminal  would of himself thus  repent.  But  if  by repentance be meant merely remorse and terror, in the immediate view of danger, what offender, surrounded with the wreck of former enjoyments, feeling  the  vanity  of  guilty  pleasures,  now  past  forever,  and beholding the approach of the delayed penal visitation, but would repent?  Were  the  principle  of  granting  pardon  to  repentance  to regulate human  governments,  every  criminal  would escape, and judicial  forms  would  become  a  subject  of  ridicule.  Nor  is  it recognized  by  the  Divine  Being,  in  his  conduct  to  men  in  the present state, although in this world punishments are not final and 

The question proposed abstractedly, How may mercy be extended to  offending  creatures,  the  subjects  of  the  divine  government, without  encouraging  vice  by  lowering  the  righteous  and  holy character  of  God,  and  the  authority  of  his  government  in  the maintenance of which the whole universe of beings are interested? is, therefore, at once one of the most important, and one of the most  difficult  that  can  employ  the  human  mind.  None  of  the theories  which  have  been  opposed  to  Christianity  affords  a satisfactory solution of the problem. They assume principles either destructive  of  moral  government,  or  which  cannot,  in  the circumstances of man be acted upon. The only answer is found in the  holy  Scriptures.  They  alone  show,  and  indeed,  they  alone profess to show, how God may be "just," and yet the "justifier" of the ungodly. Other schemes show how he may be merciful; but the difficulty does not lie there. The gospel meets it, by declaring "the righteousness  of  God,"  at  the  same  time  that  it  proclaims  his mercy. The voluntary sufferings of the divine Son of God, "for us," "the just for the unjust," magnify the justice of God; display his hatred to sin; proclaim "the exceeding sinfulness" of transgression, by the deep and painful manner in which they were inflicted upon the Substitute; warn the persevering offender of the terribleness, as well as the certainty, of his  punishment; and open the gates of salvation to every penitent. It is a part of the same divine plan, also,  to  engage  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  awaken penitence in man, and to lead the wanderer back to himself; to renew our fallen nature in righteousness, at the moment we are justified through faith, and to place us in circumstances in which we may henceforth "walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit." All the ends of government are here answered — no license is given to offence — the moral law is unrepealed — a day of judgment is still appointed — future and eternal judgments still display their awful sanctions — a new and singular display of the awful purity of the divine character is afforded — yet pardon is offered to all who seek it; and the whole world may be saved. 

With such evidence of the suitableness to the case of mankind, under such lofty views of connection with the principles and ends of moral government, does the doctrine of the atonement present itself. But other important considerations are not wanting to mark the  united  wisdom  and  goodness  of  that  method  of  extending mercy to the guilty, which Christianity teaches us to have been actually and exclusively adopted. It is rendered, indeed, "worthy of all acceptation," by the circumstance of its meeting the difficulties we have just dwelt upon — difficulties which could not otherwise have  failed  to  make  a  gloomy  impression  upon  every  offender awakened to a sense of his spiritual danger; but it must be very inattentively considered, if it does not further commend itself to us, by not only removing the apprehensions we might feel as to the severity of the Divine Lawgiver, but as exalting him in our esteem, as  "the  righteous  Lord,  who  loveth  righteousness,"  who surrendered  his  beloved  Son  to  suffering  and  death,  that  the influence of moral goodness might not be weakened in the hearts of his creatures; and as a God of love, affording in this instance a view of the tenderness and benignity of his nature, infinitely more impressive  and  affecting,  than  any  abstract  description  could convey; or than any act of creating or providential power and grace could exhibit, and, therefore most suitable to subdue that enmity which had unnaturally grown up in the hearts of his creatures, and which,  when  corrupt,  they  so  easily  transfer  from  a  law  which restrains  their  inclination,  to  the  Lawgiver  himself.  If  it  be important to us to know the extent and reality of our danger, by the death of Christ it is displayed, not in description, but in the most impressive  action;  if  it  be  important  that  we  should  have  an assurance of the divine placibility toward us, it  here receives  a demonstration incapable of being heightened; if gratitude be the most powerful motive of future obedience, and one which renders command on the one part, and active service on the other, "not grievous, but joyous," the recollection of such obligations as those which the "love of Christ" has laid us under, is a perpetual spring to this energetic affection, and will be the means of raising it to higher  and  more  delightful  activity  forever.  All  that  can  most powerfully illustrate the united tenderness and awful majesty of God, and the odiousness of sin; all that can win back the heart of man to his Maker and Lord, and render future obedience a matter of affection and delight, as well as duty; all that can extinguish the angry and malignant passions of man to man; all that can inspire a mutual benevolence, and dispose to a self-denying charity for the benefit of others; all that can arouse by hope, or tranquilize by faith,  is  to  be  found  in  the  sacrificial  death  of  Christ,  and  the principles and purposes for which it was endured." 

**1 The Hebrew term translated in the Greek Old Testament, of the *ilasmsos,*  and  in  the  common  English  version,  *atonement*  or propitiation, is *copher,* which signifies a *covering.* The verb** COPHER **"to  *cover,*"  or  "to  *make  atonement*"  denotes  the  object  of sacrifice;  and  hence,  Jesus  is  called  the  *ilasmos,*  the  covering, propitiation or atonement for our sins. 1 Jn 2:2; 1 Jn 4:10. It is a curious and remarkable fact, that God covered Adam and Eve with the skins of the first victims of death, instead of their *fig leaf* robes. This may have prefigured the fact, that while sin was atoned or expiated as respects God by the life of the victim, the effect  as  respects  man  was  a  covering  for  his  nakedness  and shame, or his sin, which divested him of his primitive innocence and beauty, and covered him with ignominy and reproach.**  

**2 *Kattallagee,* translated once *atonement;* Rom. 5:11, occurs in the New Testament *four times.* In Rom. 5:11, it ought to have been  *reconciliation,*  as  in  Rom.  11:15,  2  Co  5:18-19.  It  is  not *ilasmos,  atonement,*  in  the  Jewish  sense,  but  *katallagee, reconciliation.*  God  receives  the  atonement,  and  men  the reconciliation. It is preposterous, then, to talk to the extent of the atonement, but not so of the reconciliation.**  

**3 Heb. 9:15.**  

**4 2 Co 5:18-21.**  

**5 Heb. 9:12.**  

**6 See Eph. 1:7, Col. 1:14, 1 Pe 3:18, Isa 59:20, Rom. 8:23, Eph. 1:14; Eph. 4:30.** 

11. The Attributes of a True Sin-Offering 

    A single action or event often involves, in weal or woe, a family, a nation, an empire. Who can count the effects or bearings of the elevation  or  fall  of  a  Cesar,  a  Hannibal,  a  Napoleon?  A  single victory, like that of Zama, or of Waterloo; a single revolution, like that of England, or America, sometimes involves the fortunes of a world. Neither actions nor events can be appreciated but through their bearings and tendencies upon every person and thing with which they come in contact. The relations, connections, and critical dependencies  in  which  persons  and  actions  stand  are  often  so numerous and so various, that it is seldom, or perhaps, at all, in the power of man to calculate the consequences, or the value of one of a thousand of the more prominent actions of his life. 

Who could have estimated, or who can estimate, the moral or the political bearings of the sale of Joseph to a band of Ishmaelites — of the exposure of Moses in a cradle of rushes on the Nile — of the anointing  of  David  king  of  Israel — of  the  schism  of  the  twelve tribes under Rehoboam — of the treachery of Judas, the martyrdom of Stephen, the conversion of Paul, the accession of Constantine the Great, the apostasy of Julian, the crusades against the Turks, the reformation of Luther, the revival of letters, or any of the great movements of the present day? How difficult, then, is it to estimate the rebellion of Satan, the fall of Adam, the death of Christ, in all their bearings upon the destinies of the universe! 

Before a remedy for sin could either be devised or appreciated a knowledge  of  its  bearings  upon  God  and  man,  upon  time  and eternity, upon heaven and earth, is an indispensable prerequisite. But who possesses this knowledge, or what uninspired man can attain  it?  At  best  we  know  but  in  part;  and,  therefore,  can  but partially  explain  anything.  How  difficult,  then,  to  form  a satisfactory view of sin and its remedy — of the fall of Adam and the death of Christ! 

It  would,  however,  greatly  aid  our  conceptions  of  the  death  of Christ, and illustrate the nature and use of *sin-offerings,* could we obtain  just  and  scriptural  views  of  sin  in  its  necessary consequences,  or  in  its  prominent  bearings  upon  the  universe. Indeed, some knowledge of these aspects of sin is essential to our perception and appreciation of the wisdom, justice, and grace of the Christian system. It is not enough that we entertain a few vague and indistinct notions of its tendencies, or of the attitudes in which it stands to God, ourselves, and our fellows: we must have clear and definite views of the relations in which God stands to us, and we to him and to one another, and how sin affects us all in these relations: for that it bears a peculiar aspect to each of us in all these relations will, we doubt not, be conceded without debate. 

God  stands  in  diverse  relations  to  the  intellectual  and  moral creation. He is our Father, our Lawgiver, and our King. Now his feelings as a father, and his character as a lawgiver and sovereign, are  equally  involved  in  the  bearings  and  aspects  of  sin.  The influence of sin upon ourselves is also various and multiform. It affects the heart the conscience, the whole soul and body of man. It alienates our affections, and even works hatred to our minds both towards God and man. As an ancient adage says, "We hate those we have injured;" and having offended God our Father, we are, for that very reason, filled with enmity against him. It also oppresses and pollutes the conscience with its guilt and dread, and enslaves the passions as well as works the destruction of the body. It also alienates man from man, weakens the authority and destroys the utility of the law; and, if not subdued, would ultimately subvert the throne and government of God. If not restrained and put down, it would fill the universe with anarchy and disorder — with universal misery and ruin. 

To go no farther into details, it may, on the premises already before us, be observed: — 1st. That every sin wounds the affection of our heavenly Father — 2d. Insults and dishonors his law and authority in the estimation of his other subjects — 3d. Alienates our hearts from him — 4th.  Oppresses  our  conscience  with  guilt  and  dread — 5th. Severs us from society by its morbid selfishness and disregard for man — 5th.  Induces  to  new  infractions  and  habitual  violations  of right — And, 7th. Subjects us to shame and contempt — our bodies to the  dust,  and  our  persons  to  everlasting  destruction  from  the presence of the Lord. 

Not as the full tale, but rather as a specimen of the loss sustained, and  of  the  mischief  done,  by  our  transgression,  we  have  made these seven specifications. These only serve to show in how many aspects  sin  must  be  contemplated  before  we  can  form  a  just estimate of a suitable and sufficient sin offering or remedy. 

Now,  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  trace  the  tendencies  and bearings of transgression in the above enumeration, we must find in the *sin offering* a remedy and an antidote which will fully meet all  these  aspects;  otherwise  it  will  be  utterly  valueless  and unavailing  in  the  eye  of  enlightened  reason,  as  well  as  in  the righteous judgment of God, to expiate sins, to put it away, and to prevent its recurrence. 

Need, we demonstrate that man himself cannot furnish such a sin offering! Need we again propound Micah's question — "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? Shall I come before him, with burnt offerings; with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands  of  river  of  oil?  Shall  I  give  my  first  born  for  my transgression; the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul." Will repentance for the past, and future amendment place things as they were; raise the murdered dead; repair wasted fortunes, and recruit broken constitutions? Will tears, and groans, and agonies, honor a violated law, sustain a righteous government, vindicate the Divine character, and prevent future and further enormities? Have the ever done it? Can they ever do it? Surely, we shall be excused for not attempting to prove that we have neither a tear, nor a sigh, nor an agony, nor a lamb, nor a kid of our own creation, to offer to the Lord, even were such a sacrifice available to meet all the bearings of the case! 

Every transgression, even the least, the eating of a forbidden apple, subjects the transgressor to destruction. One sin, of one man, has involved the whole race in death. The life of the transgressor is demanded in the very mildest accents of insulted justice. Hence, in the law of the typical sin offerings, we find it thus written: "The *life* of the flesh is in the *blood:* and I have given it to you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls: **for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.**"1 But such blood, such lives as  the  law  required  could  not,  Paul  and  Common  Sense  being judge, take away sin. They could only prefigure a *life* and a *blood* that could  truly, and justly, and honorably  expiate it. Thus,  *the death of Christ* is forced upon our attention by the law, by the prophets, by the necessity of the case, enlightened Reason being in the chair, as the only real, true, and proper sin-atoning offering. It does, indeed, meet not only the above seven particulars, but all others which have occurred to the human mind; and thus secures the union and harmony of things on earth, and of things in heaven, in the inviolable bonds of an everlasting brotherhood. 

1. "In bringing many sons to glory," it soothes and delights the wounded love of our kind and benignant heavenly Father— 
1. "It  magnifies  and  makes  honorable"  his  violated  law  and insulted government— 
1. It reconciles our hearts thoroughly and forever to God, as a proof  and  pledge  incontrovertible  of  his  wonderful  and incomprehensible love to us— 
1. It effectually relieves our conscience by "cleansing us from all sin," and produces within us a divine serenity, a peace and joy "unspeakable and full of glory"— 
1. It also reconciles us to our fellows, and fills us with brotherly affection and universal benevolence, because it makes us all one in faith, in hope, in joy, as joint heirs of immortality and eternal life— 
1. It is the most effectual guard against new infractions of the divine law, and superlatively deters from sin, by opening to us its diabolical nature and tremendous consequences; showing us in the person of God's only begotten and well beloved Son, when a sin offering, the impossibility of escape, from the just and  retributive  punishment  of  insulted  and  indignant Heaven — and  
7. It is a ransom from death, a redemption from the grave, such a deliverance from the guilt, pollution, power, and punishment of sin,  as  greatly  elevates  the sons  of God above all that they could have attained or enjoyed under the first constitution. It presents a new creation to our view; — new heavens, new earth, new  bodies,  new  life,  new  joys,  new  glories.  He  that vanquished death by dying, who now sits upon the throne says, "Behold, I make all things new." "He has become the Author of an eternal salvation to all that obey him." 

Let no one imagine that in this exemplification of the aspects in which sin and sin offerings must be contemplated before we can rationally  judge  of  the  necessity,  the  suitableness,  and  the sufficiency of the death of Christ, we have attempted to present a full view of these aspects. We are incompetent to the task. The life is  too  short,  and  our  opportunities  too  limited,  to  learn  all  the bearings  of  transgression  upon  ourselves,  the  throne  and government  of  God,  and  his  other  subjects.  We  only  intend  a specimen of the points to be met in a proper sin offering. These put it  out  of  the  reach  of  all  human,  of  all  angelic,  of  all  created mediators, victims, or sacrifices to expiate sin. So far as we can comprehend this wonderful subject, we are more and more deeply penetrated  with  the  conviction,  that  nothing  inferior  to  the voluntary sacrifice of the Son of God, could put away sin; and make it both just, and merciful, and honorable, and safe, on the part of his God and Father, to forgive and save one of his rebel race.  Nor  would  it  then  have  been  just,  according  to  our conception, to  have compelled him to bear our iniquities, or to suffer the just for the unjust; to inflict on an innocent person, the chastisement of our offences; but it was both just and kind on the part  of  our  heavenly  Father,  to  accept  for  us  the  voluntary surrender of his Son, as a willing sacrifice for our sins. "Thanks be to God, for his unspeakable gift!" 

**1 Lev. 17: 11.** 

12. Christ: the Light of the World 

As Abraham said to Isaac on his way to Mount Moriah, "God," my son, "will provide himself a lamb for the burnt offering," so has it come to pass. In order to the redemption of man from sin and all its penal consequences, God has provided a lamb, for a sin offering. He sent his Son, who on coming into the world, said, "Sacrifice and offering thou wouldst not, but a body hast thou prepared me; in burnt offerings and sacrifices for sins thou has had no pleasure; then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will, in the volume of the book it is  written of me." But  he did  more than offer himself as a sin offering; he was more than the Lamb of God; he was the "prophet of Jehovah," and revealed to man the character and the will of God. He disclosed secrets hid from the foundation of the world. In one word, he is **the oracle**, as well as the **sacrifice** which God had provided for us. 

As the **Incarnate** **Word**, he is the interpreter of his will. The New Testament  is  then,  the  gift  of  Christ — and  was  written  by  his guidance and inspiration. For all that the Spirit of God has done has been through his  instrumentality. The Spirit  is  Christ's gift. Jesus is now as much "Lord of the Spirit" as he is the Lord of life and glory. The New Testament is a volume written by his servants. Six of his Apostles and two of his Evangelists wrote it all. That book is to us now in the stead of the personal presence of the Lord and his Apostles. He gave gifts to men after he left their abode. "He gave Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers." As a means of our salvation; as one of the things which God has done for us, we place the New Testament, the living oracles, or gospel of Christ, as next in order, as it is in importance, to his sacrifice. 

To the sacrifice of Christ,  we always  look  for  the basis of our pardon; to his blood that cleanses from all sin, for justification and personal  acceptance;  and  to  his  Word  we  look  for  counsel  and instruction  in  Christian  piety  and  righteousness.  We  are  as dependent on his  *Word* for light, as we are upon his  *blood* for pardon. "I am," said he, "**the light of the world**; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the *light of life.*" "In him was life, and the life was the light of men." "That was the true light," said John, "which coming into the world, enlighteneth every man." "As long as I am in the world," says Jesus, "I am the light of the world." Thus Isaiah spake of him: "I will also give thee as a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation to the ends of the earth." "I will give thee for a covenant of the people, or light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison; and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house." "His going forth is prepared as the morning." "The sun of righteousness will arise with healing under his wings." "I witness," said Paul, "both to small and great, that the Messiah should show light to the people and to the Gentiles." The Word of Christ, is the light of Christ; and therefore the Christian Scriptures are the light of the world; and he that followeth them shall have the light of life. "If  you  continue  in  my  doctrine,"  says  the  Messiah,  "you  shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free." "If the Son make you free, you shall be free indeed." 

13: The Lordship of the Messiah 

We are seeking to apprehend *the things done for us* in the Christian system. "Christ, our passover, has been sacrificed for us." As such, "not a bone was broken." Yet, "he died for us." In the second place, he has become our *prophet,* as well as our *priest;* and has declared to us the will of God; the whole will of God concerning us. He is our *light,* as well as our *sin offering.* But in the third place, he has been made *Lord* for us. To make Christ Lord *for* us, as well as *of* us — was the last act of the sublime drama of man's redemption from sin.  The  last  secret  of  the  mystery  of  Christ,  which  Peter promulged  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  was,  "Let  all  the  house  of Israel  know,  that  God  has  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  you crucified, both **Lord** and **Christ**." To make him Lord for us, was to invest him with *universal authority,* that he might have it in his power to give eternal life to all his people. Jesus, in one of his prayers, in anticipation of his investiture, says, "Thou hast given him *power over all flesh* that he might give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him." But after his resurrection from the dead, and ascension into heaven, he was crowned Lord of angels, as well as Lord of men; and therefore he said, "all authority," or lordship, "in heaven and on earth is given to me." He is now the **Lord of hosts**:  legions  of  angels,  the  armies  of  the  skies,  are  given  to him: — for what? That he might be able to do all for us that our condition  needs.  It  was  *for  us*  he  became  a  Prophet,  *for  us*  he became a priest, *for us* he has been made Lord of hosts, King of the universe, Judge and avenger of all. He is Lord of life, Lord of the Spirit, Lord of all. 

We  need  sacrifice — and  therefore  we  need  a  priest.  We  need  a Leader, a Luminary, a Sun of Righteousness; and we want one who can always help us in time of need, when we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with the rulers of the darkness of this world; with wicked spirits living in the air. In Jesus himself, in one of the conflicts, needed an angel to minister to him, we need it more. Three things are done for us; a sin offering is presented; a lamp of life is put into our hands; and all the active powers and energies in the  wide  universe  are  placed  at  the  command  of  our  King whenever we need them. These are things already done. Hence, the Holy Spirit, and all the angels of heaven are now at the disposal of our Savior: for in him all the promises of God are laid up; all the treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  all  the  fulness  of  the Deity, reside fully and truly in him. All these things, it is true, might  be  comprehended  in  one  gift — the  gift  of  Jesus  as  our Mediator; our Prophet,  Priest,  and King. Still it  is  expedient to view  the  things  done  for  us,  severally  and  distinctly  in  the Christian system.  

Other things are promised  *to  be done*  for us:  but  these are the things already done for us, and before we shall speak of the things yet to be done for us, and done in us, we shall summarily consider the things to be done by us, before anything more can be done for us, or done in us. 

14. Faith in Christ 

The things done for us will truly be to us as though they were not, unless they are believed. Hence, to the untutored and unbelieving barbarian or infidel, the universe is without a sin offering, a Sun of Righteousness,  a  Lord,  Redeemer,  and  a  Holy  Spirit.  Faith  is necessary only as a means of attainment; as a means of enjoyment. It is not, then, an arbitrary enactment or requisition, but a gracious means of salvation. 

Faith in Christ is the effect of belief. Belief is the *cause;* and trust, confidence, or faith *in* Christ, the *effect.* "*The faith,*" sometimes means *the truth* to be believed. Sometimes it means "*the belief of the  truth;*"  but  here  we  speak  of  it  metonymically,  putting  the effect for the cause — or calling the effect by the name of the cause. To believe what a person says, and to trust in him are not always identical. True, indeed, they often are; for if a person speaks to us concerning himself, and states to us matters of great interest to ourselves, requiring confidence in him, to believe what he says, and to believe or trust *in* him, are in effect, one and the same thing. Suppose a physician present himself to one that is sick, stating his ability and willingness to heal him; to believe is to trust in him, and to put ourselves under his guidance; provided, only, we love health rather than sickness, and life rather than death. 

While, then, faith is the simple belief of testimony, or of the truth, and never can be more nor less than that; as a *principle of action* it has respect to a person or thing interesting to us: and is confidence or trust in that person or thing. Now the belief of what Christ says of himself, terminates in trust or confidence in him: and as the Christian religion is a personal thing, both as respects *subject* and *object,* that faith in Christ which is essential to salvation is not the belief of any doctrine, testimony, or truth, abstractly, but belief *in* Christ; trust or confidence in him as a person, not a thing.1 We take Paul's definition of the term and of the thing, as perfectly simple, intelligible, and sufficient. For the term faith, he substitutes  *the belief of the truth.* "God has from the beginning chosen  you to 

salvation, through the sanctification of the spirit; through the belief of the truth."2 And of the thing, he says, "Faith is the *confidence* of 

things hoped for, the *conviction* of things not seen."3 And John says, it is "receiving testimony," for "If we receive the testimony of man," as a principle of action, or put trust in it, "the testimony of 

God is greater," and of course will produce greater confidence.4 Any belief, then, that does not terminate in our personal confidence in Jesus as the Christ, and to induce trustful submission to him, is not faith unfeigned; but a dead faith, and cannot save the soul. 

**1  See  the  Essay  on the  Foundation  of  Christian  Union,  on the terms *fact, testimony, faith, etc.* where this subject is treated at large.**  

**2 2 Th 2:13.  3 Heb. 11:1.  4 1 Jn 5:9.** 

15. Repentance 

Repentance is an effect of faith: for who that believes not that God exists, can have "repentance towards God"? Repentance is sorrow for sins committed; but it is more.  It  is  a resolution  to forsake them; but it is more. It is actual "ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well." This is "*repentance unto life,*" or what is truly called *reformation.* Such is the force of the command, "*Repent every one of you.*" It is not merely, Be sorry for what you have done wrong; nor is it, Resolve to do better; nor even, Try to amend your ways: but it is actual amendment of life from the views and the motives which  the  gospel  of  Christ  exhibits.  Gospel  repentance  is  the offspring of gospel light and gospel motive, and therefore, it is the effect, and not the cause, of belief of the testimony of God.  

True  repentance  is,  then,  always  consummated  in  actual reformation of life. It therefore carries in its very essence, the idea of restitution. For no man can cordially disallow or reprobate his sinful course of life, who does not redress the wrongs he has done to  the  utmost  limit  of  his  power.  To  God,  he  can  make  no restitution,  only  as  he  refunds  to  his  creatures,  whom  he  has injured. If, then, any one is convinced in his own mind, that he has injured the person, the character, or the property of his neighbor, by word or deed, and has it in his power, by word or deed, to undo the evil he has done, or to restore what he has unjustly taken away, he will certainly do it, if his repentance be according to either the law of Moses or the Gospel of Christ. Otherwise his repentance is of no value: for God cannot, without trampling on his own law, and  dishonoring  his  own  character,  forgive  any  man  who  is conscious of any sin he has done to any man, unless to the utmost extent of his power, he make good the injury he has done. Thus saith the Lord, "If a soul sin and commit a trespass against the Lord, and lie unto his neighbor in that which was delivered him to keep, or in fellowship, (i. e. trading,) or in anything taken away by violence, or has deceived his neighbor, or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it, or sweareth falsely; in any or all these that a man doeth, sinning therein: Then it shall be, because he hath sinned and is guilty, that he shall *restore* that which he took violently away, or the thing which he has *deceitfully gotten,* or that which was delivered him to keep, or that lost thing which he found, or all that about which he has sworn falsely, he shall even restore it in the *principal,* and shall add a fifth part more thereto, and give it to him to whom it appertaineth, in the day of his trespass offering, and he shall bring his trespass offering to the Lord, and the priest shall  make  atonement  for  him  before  the  Lord,  and  it  shall  be forgiven him." Levit. 6: 1-7. Sin offerings without repentance, and repentance  without  sin  offerings,  are  equally  ineffectual  before God. We sin against God always, when we sin against man; and therefore,  after making  all things  right with  man, we can only, through sacrifice, which makes the matter right with God, obtain forgiveness. To the same effect, Jesus speaks, Matt. 5:23-24, "Be reconciled to your brother," first make the matter right with him, "and then come and offer your gift."[^1] 

16. Baptism 

There are three things to be considered in baptism: — 1. The action commanded to be done; — 2. The subject specified; — 3. The meaning or design of that action. Jesus commanded a certain *character* to be the subject of a certain *action,* for a certain specific purpose or *design.*  The  questions,  then,  are,  What  that  action?  What  that subject? What that design? 

***Of The Action of Baptism*** 

The  action  is  indicated  by  a  word  as  definite,  clear,  and unequivocal,  as  any  word  in  any  language  ever  spoken  by  the many-tongued sons of Adam. Besides, in all laws and institutions, and more especially in those that are of a *positive,* rather than a *moral*  nature,  all  words  having  both  a  literal  and  a  figurative meaning,  a  common  and  a  special  signification,  are  to  be understood in their literal and common, and not in their figurative and  uncommon  import  and  acception.  So  have  decided  all  the judges of law and language, from time immemorial. 

That definite and unambiguous word, as almost universally known in these days of controversy, is *baptisma,* or *baptismos,* anglicised, not translated, *baptism.* The primary means by which the meaning of  this  word  is  ascertained  are  the  following:  1.  The  ancient lexicons and dictionaries; — 2. The ancient and modern translations of the New Testament; — 3. The ancient customs of the church; — 4. The  place  and  circumstances  of  baptizing,  as  mentioned  in  the New Testament; — and 5. The allusions to this ordinance and the expositions of it in the apostolic epistles. To each of these we shall do little more than simply advert on the present occasion. 

1. **The ancient lexicons with one consent give *immersion* as the natural, common, and primary sense of this word**. There is not known to us a single exception. Nor is there a received lexicon, ancient or modern, that does ever translate this word by the terms *sprinkling* or *pouring.* And as there are but three *actions* allowed to be Christian baptism; and as the original words, both verbs and nouns are translated *immerse* and *immersion,* in all lexicons, and never *sprinkle* or *pour;* follows it not then, that neither sprinkling, nor  pouring  is  Christian  baptism?  The  question  is  not,  whether these words are ever, like other words, used figuratively: whether they may not *metonymically* mean, *wetting* or *washing;* for these may be the effects of either sprinkling, pouring, or dipping. The question  is  not,  whether  these  words  may  be  so  used:  but  the question  is,  whether  the  action  commanded  in  *baptizo,*  be sprinkling, pouring, or immersing a person. All authorized Greek dictionaries,  ancient  and  modern,  with  one  consent,  affirm  that action to be immersion; and not sprinkling or pouring. 
2. **All Latin, English, German and French versions which we have seen, and we believe on the testimony of others, all that we  have  not  seen,  sometimes  translate  these  words,  their derivatives, or compounds, by words equivalent to *immersion:* but  on  *no  occasion*  ever  translate  them  by  sprinkling,  or pouring, or any other word equivalent to these terms**. This is an evidence  of  great  moment:  for  if  these  versions,  have  nineteen times in twenty been made by those who practice sprinkling or pouring in the name of the Lord; and if these words occur about one hundred and twenty times in the New Testament, is it not very singular that never once have such translators rendered the words by sprinkling, or pouring? a decisive proof in our judgment that it could not be so translated. Indeed, a mere English scholar, who has only heard that *baptism* is a Greek word, may indubitably ascertain that it means neither sprinkling nor pouring, by substituting the definition of the term, and trying its sense in all places where the ordinance is spoken of. This is an infallible canon of interpretation. *The proper definition of a term substituted for it will always make as good sense as the term itself.* Now, if an English reader will try *sprinkling*  or  *pouring*  in  those  places  where  he  finds  the  word *baptism,*  he  will  soon  discover  that  neither  of  these  words  can possibly represent it, if the above canon be true. For instance, we are told, that all Judea and Jerusalem went out to John and were *baptized*  of  him  in  the  Jordan.  Sprinkled  them  *in*  the  Jordan! poured them *in* the Jordan! immersed them in the Jordan. Can any doubt,  which  of  these  truly  represents  the  original  in  such passages?  I  may  sprinkle  or  pour  water  upon  a  person;  but  to sprinkle or pour them into water is impossible. It is not said he baptized water upon them, but he baptized them in water, in the river. 
3. **The ancient church, it is admitted on all hands, practiced immersion.** It did so, Roman, Greek and English historians being worthy of any credit. 
3. **The places where baptism was anciently administered, being rivers, pools, baths, and places of much water, show that it was not sprinkling or pouring**. They went down *into* the water, and came up *out* of it, etc. And John baptized where there were many waters or much water. And even Paul and Silas went out of the Philippian jail to baptize the jailor at night, rather than send for a cup of water! 
3. **It  is  also  alluded  to  and  explained  under  the  figure  of  a burial and resurrection, as relating to the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus, etc**. Rom. 6 and Col. 2. 

   From these topics many clear and conclusive arguments may be drawn, on which it is not now our business to dwell. If, indeed, any one of these five topics be correct, the action that Christ commands is  forever  decided.  How  much  more,  when  they  all  concur  in asserting the same interpretation! There is, then, but one baptism, and not two under the Christian administration. 

***The Subject of Baptism*** 

*Characters,*  not  *persons,*  as  such,  are  the  subjects  of  baptism. *Penitent believers* — not infants nor adults, not males nor females, not Jews nor Greeks; but professors of repentance towards God, and faith in Jesus Christ are the proper subjects of this ordinance. "To  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  he  granted  privilege  of becoming the sons  of God, to  them that believed on his name, which were born not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God." "He that believeth, and is baptized — not he that is baptized and believeth, shall be saved." "Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized," not many of the Corinthians were baptized and then believed, and finally heard the Gospel! "for without faith it is impossible to please God," etc. 

***The Meaning of Baptism*** 

"In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins." "And Jesus said that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." Therefore, Peter said to the penitent Pentecostians, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins." Again, "As many of you as have been baptized or immersed into Christ, have put on Christ, have been immersed into his death;" "have risen with him." 

Baptism is, then, designed to introduce the subjects of it into the participation  of  the  blessings  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of Christ;  who  "died  for  our  sins,"  and  "rose  again  for  our justification."  But  it  has  no  abstract  efficacy.  Without  previous faith in the blood of Christ, and deep and unfeigned repentance before God, neither immersion in water nor any other action can secure  to  us  the  blessings  of  peace  and  pardon.  It  can  merit nothing. Still to the believing penitent it is the *means* of receiving a formal,  distinct,  and  specific  absolution,  or  release  from  guilt. Therefore, none but those who have first believed the testimony of God  and  have  repented  of  their  sins,  and  that  have  been intelligently immersed into  his  death,  have the full and explicit testimony of God, assuring them of pardon. To such only as are truly penitent, dare we say, 'Arise and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling upon the name of the Lord;' and to such only can we say with assurance, "You are washed, you are justified, you are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God." But  let  the  reader  examine  with  care  our  special  essay  on  the Remission of Sins, in which this much debated subject is discussed at considerable length. 

17. The Christian Confession of Faith 

    The only apostolic and divine confession of faith which God, the Father  of  all,  has  laid  for  the  church — and  that  on  which  Jesus himself  said  he  would  build  it,  is  the  sublime  and  supreme proposition: **That** **Jesus of** **Nazareth is the** **Messiah, the** **Son of the living** **God**. This is the peculiarity of the Christian system: its specific attribute. The antediluvian Abel, Enoch, etc. believed that a  Son  of  Eve  would  bruise  Satan's  head.  Abraham,  Isaac,  and Jacob believed that a peculiar son of theirs would be the child of blessings, the Son of promise to the human race. Indeed, Jesse, David, and all the Prophets, looked for one from the sceptred tribe, who would be king of all the earth, and a benefactor of humanity. John  the  Baptist,  in  his  day,  preached  and  believed  that  the Messenger of the covenant of eternal peace was immediately to appear.  But  the  disciples  of  Jesus,  son  of  Mary,  believed  and confessed that he was the identical person. "We have found him of whom Moses in the law, and all the Prophets did write; Jesus of Nazareth,  the  Son  of  David,  the  King  of  Israel."  "Rabbi,"  said Nathaniel, "thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel." But yet it remained for Peter to speak fully and expressly, the very proposition which contains the whole matter. "We believe and are sure that thou art the Messiah, the Son of the living God." "On this rock," responded he, with a blessing upon Peter's name and head: "On this rock I will build my church, and the gates of Hades shall not  prevail against it."  Of this  foundation Paul has said,  "other foundation can no man lay than that which is already laid, which is Jesus Christ." God himself laid this corner, this tried and precious stone, as the foundation of the temple of grace; and therefore with his own lips pronounced him his beloved Son; and sealed him by the visible descent and impress of his Spirit, as his Messiah, the Messenger of Life and Peace to a condemned and rebellious world. 

This  confession  of  faith  has  in  it  two  distinct  ideas — the  one concerning the *person,* the other concerning the *office* of the Son of Man. The one asserts his divine relations, the other, his official rank and glory. No one can intelligently believe this proposition, and not turn to God with all his heart: for there is in it a thousand thoughts and motives, to bind the soul to God, and melt it into the most affectionate devotion. There is also in it the strongest bond to secure the affections of all Christians to one another. There is no other confession of faith, on which the church can be built, on which it can possibly stand one and undivided, but on this one. With  the  heart  man  believes  this  proposition  in  order  to justification; and with his mouth he maketh this confession of it in order to his salvation. So Paul explains it, Rom. x; and thus we have one Lord, one faith, and one baptism, among the immutable reasons why Christians should maintain unity of spirit in the bonds of peace.[^2] 

18. Conversion and Regeneration 

    The change which is consummated by immersion, is sometimes called in sacred style, "*being quickened,*" or "*made alive,*" "*passing from death to life,*" "*being born again,*" "*having risen with Christ,*" "*turning  to  the  Lord,*"  "*being  enlightened,*"  "*conversion,*" "*reconciliation,*"  "*repentance  unto  life.*"  These,  like  the  words propitiation,  atonement,  reconciliation,  expiation,  redemption, expressive  of  the  various  aspects  which  the  death  of  Christ sustains, are expressive of the different relations in which this great change, sometimes called a "new creation," may be contemplated. The entire change effected in man by the Christian system, consists in four things: — a change of views; a change of affections; a change of state; and a change of life. Now, in respect of each of these separately or in combination, it is called by different names. As a change of *views,* it is called "being enlightened;" "Once you were darkness, now you are light in the Lord; walk as children of the light;" "After that you were enlightened," etc. As a change of the *affections,* it is called "being reconciled;" thus, "for if when we were enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled we shall be saved through his life." As a change of *state,* it is called "being quickened;" "passing from death to life," "being born again," "having risen with Christ," "And you *hath he quickened* who were dead in trespasses and sins," "By this we know we have *passed from death to life,* because we love the  brethren,"  "Being  *born  again,*  not  of  corruptible,  but  of incorruptible  seed,  the  word  of  God,  which  liveth  and  abideth forever." "If you be," or "since you *are risen with Christ,* set your affections  on  things  above,  not  on  things  on  the  earth."  As  a change of *life* it is called "repentance unto life," "turning to the Lord,"  "conversion;"  "Then  God  has  granted  to  the  Gentiles repentance to life." "And all that dwelt in Lydda and Saron saw Eneas  and  *turned  to  the  Lord.*"  "Except  you  be  converted,  and become as children, you shall not enter the kingdom of heaven." "When  thou  art  converted,  strengthen  thy  brethren."  "He  that converts a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and hide a multitude of sins." 

Great confusion has been introduced into the Christian community by a confounding of these terms, making only one of them to mean all the others. Witness the controversy about *regeneration;* as if that word were used in sacred Scripture in reference to the entire change  effected  by  the  Christian  system;  whereas,  in  strict propriety, it is never used by itself in the Bible to represent any part of this change, much less the whole of it. We have the phrase "*washing  of  regeneration*"  once,  in  contradistinction  from  the "renewal of the Holy Spirit," (Titus 3:5) but never, by itself, as indicative  of  this  four-fold  change.  But  suppose  it  should  be conceded, that the term *regeneration* might be just equivalent to "*being born again,*" it could even then only represent so much of this change as respects mere *state:* for the figure of a new birth applies merely to admission into a family or nation; and not to the process of quickening or making alive of the person so admitted. It can, then, in strict propriety, only apply to the fourth part of that change which the gospel of salvation proposes and effects. Being *born again* is, or may be the *effect* of a change of views, of a change of affections; or it may be the *cause* of a change of life; but certain it is, it is not identical with any of them, and never can represent them all. 

But may it not include them all? It is impossible: for however we might  extend the figure and suppose it to  include its causes, it cannot also include its  effects.  If it should include a change of views,  a  change  of  affections,  and  a  change  of  state,  it  cannot include a change of life, or of character. We ought then to use this word in its strict and scriptural acceptance, if we would escape the great confusion now resting upon this subject. The sophistry or delusion of this confusion is, that making *regeneration* equivalent to  the  entire  change  instead  of  to  be  one-fourth  part  of  it,  the community will always be imposed on and misled by seeking to find the attributes of conversion in the new birth, or of the new birth in conversion; and so of all the others. Being born again is not *conversion,* nor a *change of views,* nor a *change of affections,* but a *change of state.* True, indeed, that of the person who is born again we may suppose a change of views, a change of heart, and we may infer  a  change  of  character,  and  may  therefore  say  he  is enlightened, renewed in heart, converted as well as born again; but this license respecting the *person,* the subject of the change, is not allowed in talking of the *change* itself. A Christian is, indeed, one whose  views  are  enlightened,  whose  heart  is  renewed,  whose relations to God and the moral universe are changed, and whose manner of life is according to righteousness and true holiness. 

19. Christians are Persons Pardoned, Justified, Sanctified, Adopted, and Saved. 

    While  adjusting  the  most  important  terms  and  phrases  in  the Christian  system,  in  order  to  a  more  perspicuous  and comprehensive intelligence of it, it is expedient that we should also advert to other predicates of the genuine Christian. The five terms at the head of this chapter are all indicative of his *state;* and do not include any attributes of his *character.* 

These predicates are but  so  many counterpart aspects  of a new state in reference to an old one; or they represent the gospel as affecting the position of man in the universe in all those points in which sin affected him. Was he guilty, condemned, unholy, alien, and lost, in Adam the first? When in Adam the second, he is just in an opposite state; — he is pardoned wherein he was guilty — justified wherein  he  was  condemned — sanctified  wherein  he  was unholy — adopted wherein he was alien — and saved wherein he was lost.  Sin,  then,  condemns,  pollutes,  alienates,  and  destroys  its subjects. Grace justifies, sanctifies, adopts, and saves its subjects in reference to these points. Pardon has respect to guilt; justification, to  condemnation;  sanctification,  to  pollution;  adoption,  to alienation; and salvation, to destruction. Those *out of Christ,* are then, in their sins, condemned, unholy, alien, and lost; while those *in Christ* are pardoned, justified, sanctified, adopted into the family of God, and saved. 

In  former  dispensations,  and  in  the  present,  two  things  are immutable as respects the preparation for a change of state, while the  act  by  which  that  change  is  formally  consummated  is  not necessarily immutable. Thus, in reference to actual transgression, faith  and  repentance,  in  all  dispensations  of  religion,  were necessary  to  forgiveness,  justification,  sanctification,  adoption, salvation.  In  one  word,  God  cannot  forgive  an  impenitent  and unbelieving  transgressor.  But  whether  this  or  that  act  shall consummate a change of state, as respects man's relations to the moral  universe;  whether  that  act  shall  be  circumcision,  animal sacrifice,  baptism,  confession,  prayer,  etc.  is  not  from  any necessity, either in the divine or human nature, immutable. It has been changed; but faith in God's appointments, and repentance for past transgressions, are now, always were, and ever more shall be, necessary to forgiveness. 

The  philosophy  or  reason  of  this  is,  that  faith  and  repentance change  the  state  of  man's  heart  to  God;  and  if  there  was  no universe beyond God and the sinner, all farther acts respecting it would be uncalled for. But as respects the condition of sinners in the universe, and their views, affections, relations, and manner of life, more than faith and repentance, or a change of views  and feelings, is necessary to actual, and sensible, and formal pardon, justification, sanctification, adoption, and the salvation of the soul from  sin.  Hence  came  the  ordinances  of  baptism,  confession, prayer, fasting, and intercession. 

It is wise and kind on the part of Heaven to ordain such acts, or to institute such ordinances as will assure ourselves and others of our new relations; and to suspend our *enjoyment* of the favor and love of God, not merely upon faith and penitence, or any other mental operation;  but  upon  certain  clear,  overt  acts,  such  as  baptism, confession, prayer, etc. which affect ourselves and others, much more than they possibly can affect God himself; being the fruit of our faith, or perhaps, rather, only the perfecting of our faith in the promises of God.  

20. The Gift of the Holy Spirit 

    Having spoken of three things which God has done for us, and of three things which we must do for ourselves, we are now come to the proper place to consider other aids which our heavenly Father tenders to us, just at this point. "He has provided a Lamb for a sin offering," and "Jesus has full atonement made." He has also given to us "the *light* of life" — the words of Jesus faithfully written out; and he has invested him as the Son of Man, with all authority, celestial and terrestrial, that he may lead many sons to glory, and give eternal life to all that are given him. 

We  also  have  believed  all  this;  repented  of  our  sins,  and  been immersed into Christ. We have assumed him as our Leader — our Prophet, Priest, and King; and put ourselves under his guidance. Having disowned the  great  apostate  and his  ranks, and enlisted under the Messiah, and taken sides with the Lord's Anointed; he now proposes to put his Holy Spirit within us, to furnish us for the good fight of faith, and to anoint us as the sons and heirs of God. 

Some will ask, Has not this gift been conferred on us to make us Christians? True, indeed, no man can say, that Jesus is Lord but by the Holy Spirit. As observed in its proper place, the Spirit of God is the perfecter, and finisher of all divine works. "The Spirit of God moved upon the waters;" "The hand of the Lord has made me, the Spirit of the Almighty has given me life;" "By his Spirit he has garnished the heavens, his hand has formed the crooked serpent," the milky way; "The Spirit descended upon him;" "God himself bore the Apostles witness, by divers miracles and gifts of the Holy Spirit according to his will;" "Holy men of old spake as they were moved by the Holy Spirit;" "When the Spirit of truth, the Advocate is come, he will convict the world of sin, because they believe not on me, and of justification, because I go to my Father;" "God was manifest in the flesh and justified by the Spirit."  

The  Spirit  of  God  inspired  all  the  spiritual  ideas  in  the  New Testament, and confirmed them by miracles; and he is ever present with the word that he inspired. He descended from heaven on the day of Pentecost, and has not formally ascended since. In the sense in which he descended he certainly has not ascended: for he is to animate and inspire with new life the church or temple of the Lord. "Know you not," you Christians, "that your bodies are temples of the living God;" "The temple of God is holy, which temple you are;" "If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, God shall quicken your mortal bodies by *his Spirit that dwelleth in you,*" etc. 

Now we cannot separate the Spirit and word of God, and ascribe so much power to the one and so much to the other; for so did not the Apostles. Whatever the word does, the Spirit does; and what ever the Spirit does in the work of converting men, the word does. We neither  believe  nor  teach  abstract  Spirit  nor  abstract  word — but word and Spirit, and Spirit and word. 

But the Spirit is not *promised to any persons out of Christ.* It is promised  only  to  them  that  believe  in  and  obey  him.  These  it actually and powerfully assists in the mighty struggle for eternal life.  Some,  indeed,  ask,  'Do  Christians  need  more  aid  to  gain eternal life — than sinners do to become Christians? Is not the work of  conversion  a  more  difficult  work  than  the  work  of sanctification?' Hence, they contend more for the work of the Spirit in  conversion,  than  for  the  work  of  the  Spirit  in  sanctification. This, indeed, is a mistaken view of the matter, if we reason either from analogy or from divine testimony. Is it not more easy to plant, than to cultivate the corn, the vine, the olive? Is it not more easy to enlist in the army, than to be a good soldier, and fight the battles of the Lord; to start in the race, than to reach the goal; to enter the ship than cross the ocean; to be naturalized, than to become a good citizen;  to  enter  into  the  matrimonial  compact  than  to  be  an exemplary husband; to enter life, than to retain and sustain it for three score years and ten? And while the commands, "*believe,*" "*repent,*"  and  "*be  baptized,*"  are  never  accompanied  with  any intimation of peculiar difficulty; the commands to the use of the means of spiritual health and life; to form the Christian character; to attain the resurrection of the just; to lay hold on eternal life; to make our calling and election sure, etc. are accompanied with such exhortations, admonitions, cautions, as to make it a difficult and critical affair, requiring all the aids of the Spirit of our God, to all the means of grace and untiring assiduity and perseverance on our part; for it seems, "the called" who enter the stadium are many, while "the chosen" and approved "are few;" and many, says Jesus, "shall seek to enter into the heavenly city, and shall not be able;" "Let us labor, therefore, to enter into that rest lest any man fall after the same example of unbelief." 

Sanctification in one point of view, is unquestionably a progressive work. To sanctify is to set apart; this may be done in a moment, and  so  far  as  mere  *state*  or  *relation*  is  concerned,  it  is  as instantaneous  as  baptism.  But  there  is  the  formation  of  a  holy character: for there is a holy *character* as well as a holy *state.* The formation of such a character is the work of means; "Holy Father," said Jesus, "sanctify them, through the truth; thy word is the truth;" "And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly," says Paul to the Thessalonians, "and I pray God  your whole spirit and soul and body  be  preserved  blameless  to  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus Christ." Christians, then, are to "follow peace with all men, and sanctification,  without  which  no  one  shall  see  the  Lord." Therefore, it is the duty and the work of Christians, "to *perfect* holiness in the fear of the Lord." 

This requires aid. Hence, assistance is to be prayed for; and it is promised. Now as the Spirit of God, under the administration of Christ, is the author of all holiness in us — he is called the "Holy Spirit," "the Spirit of holiness." Hence, while we have the phrase "Holy  Ghost"  or  Spirit,  *ninety-four  times*  in  the  Christian Scriptures, it is found only three times in all the Jewish writings. The Holy Spirit is, then, the author of all our holiness; and in the struggle  after  victory  over  sin  and  temptation,  "*it  helps  our infirmities,*"  and  comforts  us  by  seasonably  bringing  to  our remembrance the promises of Christ, and "strengthens us with all might, in the new, or inner man." And thus "God works in us to will and to do of his own benevolence," "while we are working out our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  Christians  are, therefore, clearly and unequivocally temples of the Holy Spirit; and they are quickened, animated, encouraged, and sanctified by the power and influence of the Spirit of God, working in them through the truth. 

God "gives his Holy Spirit to them who ask him," according to his revealed  will;  and  without  this  gift  no  one  could  be  saved  or ultimately triumph over all opposition. He knows but little of the deceitfulness of sin, or of the combatting of temptation, who thinks himself competent to wrestle against the allied forces of the world, the  flesh  and  the  devil.  Hence,  the  necessity  of  "supplications, deprecations, intercessions, and thanksgivings," or praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Holy Spirit, and watching thereunto with all perseverance, and of making supplication for all saints, our fellow soldiers in this good warfare. 

To  those,  then,  who  believe,  repent,  and  obey  the  gospel,  he actually communicates of his Good Spirit. The fruits of that spirit in them, are "love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness, goodness, fidelity, meekness, temperance." The attributes of character which distinguish the new man, are each of them communications of the Holy Spirit, and thus we are the sons of God in fact, as well as in title, under the dispensations of the Holy Spirit. 

We  have,  then,  every  thing  done  for  us,  after  our  conversion, which we need in order to that "holiness without which no one shall see the Lord." Thus God has provided for us a sin offering; a *prophet* to expound it; a *priest* to present it; a *king,* with universal dominion, to govern, and protect all that by it are reconciled to God. And when through faith, repentance, and baptism, we have assumed  him  as  our  rightful  Sovereign,  by  his  Holy  Spirit,  in answer to our prayers, he worked in us, and by us, and for us, all that is needful to our present, spiritual, and eternal salvation. 

21. The Christian Hope 

"Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him — that we shall see him as he is. And every one that has this hope in him, purifies himself even as he is pure." "God has predestinated us to be conformed to the image off his Son." "I reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  life  are  not  worthy  to  be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." "He hath begotten us again to a lively hope; to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  So  testify  three Apostles — John, Paul, and Peter. The whole hope of the Christian may, indeed, be summed up in one sentence;  "If children, then *heirs — heirs of God,* **joint heirs with christ**." Immortality, eternal life, the riches  of Christ, the glory, honor,  wealth, and bliss  of God's only begotten Son are to be equally participated with all his saints. 

The remedial system is, therefore, a moral creation in progress — a new  creation  of  men  unto  good  works,  still  advancing;  but  its termination will be the stereotyping of individual moral excellence by  an  instantaneous  physical  new  creation  of  men  at  the resurrection of the just: or a manifestation of the sons of God in full  redemption  from  the  whole  entail  of  sin;  raised,  refined, immortalized glorified, and invested with eternal life. 

Hope differs from faith, in  that it looks only  forward to future objects.  It  looks  not  back,  nor  does  it  contemplate  the  present: "for," says Paul, "what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?" Nor looks it on all the future; but only on future *good.* It desires and expects good and nothing else. There is not one dark cloud, not one dark speck, in all the heavens of Christian hope. Every thing seen in its wide dominions, in the unbounded prospect yet before us, is bright,  cheering,  animating,  transporting.  It  is  all  desirable  and desired.  It  is  all  expected.  It  is  all  "earnest  expectation;"  not  a doubtful, but a "confident expectation of things" desirable, and to be "hoped for." 

It is not what some in this age call "the hope," i.e. the desirable expectancy  of  pardon  of  their  past  transgressions:  for  none  but those who are actually pardoned are the subjects of this hope. "If our heart condemn us, then indeed, we have no confidence;" so no confident expectation, no hope of eternal life. The mere possibility of  an  event  is  no  foundation  of  hope.  Hope  deals  not  in possibilities, nor indeed much in probabilities — unless they are very strong  probabilities.  Conjectures,  peradventures,  possibilities, probabilities, are not of the essence of Christian hope. It rests on covenants,  charters,  promises,  oaths,  tendered  by  the  Eternal Source of almighty truth and love. These are good securities; and produce assurance. Hence, hope is the assurance of future good in expectation.  

There are, indeed, various degrees of hope; but in the least degree of it there is desire combined with expectation. Things expected are  not  always  desirable,  nor  are  things  desirable  always  to  be expected: but hope embraces promises that are desirable, and also expects the enjoyment of them. Hence, hope, like faith and love, may grow exceedingly. When based on the promises of God, and on an habitual patient conformity to his will, it will keep pace with our growing intelligence of the character of God; of the fulness and richness  of  the  promises,  and  in  the  persuasion  of  our  actual devotion to the manifestations of that will. 

But *the things hoped for* by the Christian are beyond description. Eye, indeed, has not seen, ear has not heard, the human heart has not conceived the glories of the resurrection of the just; — the new bodies, the new heavens, the new earth, the new Jerusalem, the new society, the new pleasures: for according to his promise we look for (expect) new heavens and new earth in which righteous persons alone shall dwell. Thus terminates the remedial system on all its happy subjects. "It lifts the beggar from the dust, and the wretched from the dunghill, and sets them among princes, amongst the nobles of the universe;" the thrones, hierarchies, and lordships of the skies; in the presence of God, too, "where there is fulness of joy, and at his right hand, where there are pleasures forever more." Such are the things to be done for those, for whom such things have already been done as constitute the remedial system: for with Paul we must say: "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up to the death for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" "All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours; and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's." 

22. The Doom of the Wicked 

There are two classes of men in this world. They are often and in various  manners  contradistinguished  from  each  other.  They  are called the righteous and the wicked, the saints and the sinners, the holy and the unholy, the good and the bad, he that feareth God, and he that feareth him not. Of the one class manythings are predicated which are not predicated of the other. Of the one it is said, that they "in Christ," justified, sanctified, saved, children of God, heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ, an elect race, a royal priesthood, a peculiar  people.  Of  the  other  class,  these  things  are  never predicated in the Bible. They are not in Christ, not justified, not sanctified, not saved; children of the devil, "children of wrath," not an elect race, not a royal priesthood, not a peculiar people. 

These have not been reconciled to God through the propitiation of his Son. They are still enemies of God in heart. And for them that loved darkness rather than light, and would not have God's Son to be their Savior, he has appointed a day of judgment; a day for the ultimate perdition of ungodly men. Then they shall perish "with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall come to be glorified in all his saints, and to be admired by all the believers." Then will the King say to them on his left hand, "Depart, you cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels." They are the allies of Satan in his rebellion against God, and have spent their energies and  fortunes  on  his  side  of  the  question;  and  therefore  it  is reasonable that they should have their ultimate portion with him. 

Of  this  judgment,  Enoch,  the  seventh  from  Adam,  prophesied, saying, "Behold the Lord cometh with ten thousand of his saints, to execute  judgment  upon  all,  and  to  convict  all  that  are  ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." God had, then, long before the Christian era — from the foundation of the world, "*appointed a day* in which he will judge **the world**, (the whole world,) righteously by Jesus Christ," whom he has constituted Judge of all the dead as well as of the living. 

"It  is,  indeed,  appointed  to  men  once  to  die,  and  after  this  the judgment."  The  judgment  consequent  upon  death,  is  not  the general but the particular judgment of individuals, as the phrase would seem to indicate, whose spirits returning to God are judged and instantly rewarded, so far as in a separate state they can be the subjects of reward or punishment. But the "*judgment of the great day,*" is for another purpose: not, as some profanely say, "to bring men out of heaven and hell to judge and remand them back again;" but  in  the  presence  of  an  assembled  world  to  vindicate  the administration of the moral government and providence of God, to develop the real characters of angels and of men, and to pronounce an irrevocable sentence upon all according to their works. For, says Paul, "we must all appear before the tribunal of Christ, that every one may receive, *in his body,* the things he has done, whether good or bad." It is, then, because of the actual and public pronunciation and execution of this judgment, that the last day is called "**the day of judgment**," and that the judgment itself if called "**the judgment of the great day**." 

The final judgment and "*perdition of ungodly men*" is set forth by the Lord himself, as well as by his Apostles, in the clearest and strongest  terms,  and  in  the  boldest  and  most  appalling  imagery which human speech and human knowledge can afford. Indeed, to place this awfully sublime and glorious day in full array before the perceptive  powers  of  man,  is  impossible.  The  best  efforts  have exhausted the powers of nature in all her wonted energies. John, in his sublime visions of the last acts of the great drama of human existence, says, "I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it, from whose face earth and heaven fled away, and there was found no room for them. And  I saw the  dead, small and  great,  stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened,  which  is  called  the  Book  of  Life;  and  the  dead  were judged out of the things that were written in those books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and the grave1 gave up the dead which were in them; and 

they were judged every one according to his works: and death and 

the grave were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death. And whosoever was not found written in the **Book of** **Life** was cast into the lake of fire." Surely "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." 

**1 Hades.** 

23. Summary of the Christian System of Facts 

    God alone is self-existent and eternal. Before earth and time were born he operated by his **Word** and his **Spirit**. **God, the** **Word of** **God**, and  **the** **Spirit  of**  **God**, participants  of one and the same nature,  are  the  foundations  of  *Nature,  Providence,*  and *Redemption.* In *Nature* and *Providence,* it is **God**, the **Word**, and the **Spirit**. In *Grace,* it is the **Father**, the **Son**, and the **Holy** **Spirit**. All creations, providences, and remedial arrangements display to us  the  co-operation  of  **three  divine  participants**,  of  one self-existent,  independent,  incommunicable  nature.  These  are fundamental conceptions of all the revelations and developments of the Divinity, and necessary to all rational and sanctifying views of religion. 

In the *Law* and in the *Gospel* these sacred and mysterious relations and personal manifestations of God are presupposed and assumed as the basis of the whole procedure. "God created *all things* by Jesus Christ, and for him." "The Word was in the beginning with God," "before all things," and "by him all things consist." "God created man upright." Man sinned: all became mortal: our nature became susceptible of evil. It is in this respect fallen and depraved. "There is none righteous — no, not one." God the Father has chosen men in Christ to salvation "through the sanctification of the Spirit unto  obedience,  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus;"  and "promised,"  to  such,  "eternal  life  before  the  foundation  of  the world." 

Therefore, in "the fulness of time" — "in *due* time, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman" — for "the **Word** became flesh, and dwelt among  us;  and  we  beheld  his  glory,  the  glory  as  of  an  only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." "He showed us the Father." He died as a sin-offering — was buried, rose again the third day — ascended to heaven — presented his offering in the true Holy Place — made expiation for our sins — "forever sat down on the right hand of the Supreme Majesty in the heavens" — sent down his Holy Spirit — inspired his Apostles, who "preached with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven" — persuaded many Jews and Gentiles that he was made "the author of an eternal salvation to all who obeyed him."  He  commanded  faith,  repentance,  and  baptism  to  be preached in his name for remission of sins to every nation and people under heaven. 

All who "believe in him are justified from all things;" because this faith is living, active, operative, and perfected by "obeying from the  heart  that  mould  of  doctrine  delivered  to  us."  Hence  such persons repent of their sins, and obey the gospel. They receive the Spirit of God, and the promise of eternal life — walk in the Spirit, and are sanctified to God, and constituted heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ. They shall be raised from the dead incorruptible, immortal, and shall live forever with the Lord; while those "who know not God, and obey not the gospel of his Son, shall perish with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power." 

24. The Body of Christ 

That institution which separate from the world, and consociates the people of God into a peculiar community; having laws, ordinances, manners, and customs of its own, immediately derived from the Savior of the world, is called the *congregation* or *church* of the Lord. This is sometimes technically called the *mystical* body of Christ, contradistinguished from his literal and natural body. Over this spiritual body he is the Head, the King, Lord, and Lawgiver, and  they  are  severally  members  of  his  body,  and  under  his direction and government. 

The *true* Christian church, or house of God, is composed of all those  in  every  place  that  do  publicly  acknowledge  Jesus  of Nazareth as the true Messiah, and the only Savior of men; and, building  themselves  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Apostles  and Prophets,  associate under the constitution which he himself has granted and authorized in the New Testament, and are walking in his ordinances and commandments — and of none else. 

This  institution,  called  *the  congregation  of  God,*  is  a  great community  of  communities — not  a  community  representative  of communities;  but  a  community  composed  of  many  particular communities; each of which is built upon the same foundation, walks according to the same rules, enjoys the same charter, and is under the jurisdiction of no other community of Christians; but is to all other communities as an individual disciple is to every other individual disciple in any one particular community meeting in any given place.  

Still,  all  these  particular  congregations  of  the  Lord,  whether  at Rome,  Corinth,  or  Ephesus,  though  equally  independent  of  one another, as to the management of their own peculiar affairs; are, by virtue  of  one  common  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  and  one common salvation, but one kingdom or church of God; and, as such, are under obligations to co-operate with one another in all measures  promotive  of  thee  great  ends  of  Christ's  death  and resurrection. 

But, in order to this holy communion and co-operation of churches, it  is  indispensable  that  they  have  an  intimate  and  approving knowledge of one another, which can only be had and enjoyed in the form of districts. Thus the "congregations in Judea" intimately knew one another, and co-operated. Those in Galatia also knew one another, and co-operated. And while some of the churches or brethren in each district being mutually acquainted with some in another, made the churches of both districts acquainted with one another, they were enabled to co-operate, to the ends of the earth. 

These districts are a part of the *circumstances* of Christ's kingdom, as  well  as  the  *manner*  of  maintaining  correspondence  and co-operation  among  them,  and  the  occasions  and  incidents requiring concert and conjoint action. For these, as well as for the circumstantials of any particular community, the Apostles gave no specific directions. It was, indeed, impossible they could: for as the circumstances of particular communities, and of the whole church, vary  at  different  times  and  places,  no  one  set  of  particular, sectional,  or  intersectional  regulations  could  suit  all  these peculiarities and emergencies. These, then, are necessarily left to the wisdom and discretion of the whole community, as the peculiar exigencies and mutations of society may require. 

But  in  granting to  the  communities of the saints  this necessary license  of  deciding  what  is  expedient,  orderly,  decent,  and  of public and practical utility in the circumstantials of Christianity, no allowance  is  implied  authorizing  any  interference  with  a  single item of the Christian institution. Hence the necessity of a very clear discrimination, not between "the essentials and non-essentials," for in Divine Christianity there are no non-essentials; but between the family  of  God  and  its  circumstances — between  the  Christian institution  and  its  accidents.  Certain  it  is  that  there  is  a  very manifest  difference  between  any  individual  man,  family, community,  or  institution,  and  its  circumstances.  What  more evident than the difference between a man  and his  apparel,  his house, his neighborhood, his associations and connections? 

The Christian institution has its facts, its precepts, its promises, its ordinances, and their meaning or doctrine. These are not matters of policy,  of  arrangement,  of  expediency;  but  of  divine  and immutable  ordination  and  continuance.  Hence  the  faith,  the worship, and the righteousness; or the doctrine, the piety, and the morality  of  the  gospel  institution  are  not  legitimate  subjects  of human  legislation,  alteration,  or  arrangement.  No  man  nor community can touch these and be innocent. These rest upon the wisdom and authority of Jehovah; and he that meddles with these, presumes to do that which the cherubim and seraphim dare not. Whatever, then, is a part of the Christian faith or the Christian hope — whatever constitutes ordinances or precepts of worship, or statutes of moral right and wrong, like the ark of the covenant, is not to be touched with uninspired and uncommissioned hands. 

But whether we shall register the churches in a given district, or the members in a particular church; whether we shall meet oftener than once on the Lord's day, or at what hour, and in what sort of house; whether we shall commemorate the Lord's death forenoon or afternoon, before day or after night; whether we shall sit round one board, or in our respective pews; whether we shall sing from book or from memory, prose or verse, etc. etc. are matters in which our conceptions of expediency, decency, and good order may have free scope. Also, whether the churches in a given district shall, by letter, messengers, or stated meetings, once or twice per annum, or oftener, communicate with one another; whether they shall send one, two, or twenty persons, or all go and communicate face to face, or send a letter; and whether they shall annually print, write, or publish their statistics, etc. etc. etc. are the mere circumstantials of the Christian institution. 

But co-operation itself is one thing, and the manner of co-operation another.  Co-operation,  as  much  as  the  intercommunion  of Christians, is a part of the Christian institution. We must "*strive together* in our prayers" for one another, and for the salvation of men; and this, if there were no scriptural example nor precept on the subject, is enough. To pray for one another as individuals or communities, implies that we shall assist one another in very way for  which  we  pray  for  one  another:  otherwise  our  prayers  and thanksgivings for each other are mere hypocrisy. He that would pray for the progress of the truth at home and abroad, having it in his  power  to  contribute  a  single  dollar  to  that  end,  and  yet withholds it, shows how little value he sets upon his own prayers, and how much upon his money. 

From the days of the Apostles till now co-operative associations of churches have uniformly followed the political distributions of the earth.  Those  "in  Judea,  Galatia,  Achaia,  Pontus,  Cappadocia, Macedonia, Asia, Bithynia," etc. etc. are designations of churches and  brethren  familiar  to  all  New  Testament  readers.  This  is  a matter  of  convenience,  rather  than  of  necessity;  just  as  the churches  in  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  etc.  can generally more conveniently and successfully co-operate by states and territories, than by any other divisions or precincts. I say, this is matter of convenience, rather than of necessity. It is of necessity that we co-operate, but of convenience that the churches in one county,  state,  or  nation,  form  regular  ways  and  means  for co-operation. 

The  necessity  of  co-operation  is  felt  every  where  and  in  all associations of men. It is a part of the economy of Heaven. What are mountains, but grains of sand! What are oceans, but drops of water! And what the mightiest and most triumphant armies, but collections of individual men! How much more good or ill can be done by co-operation, than by individual enterprise, the history of the world, both civil and ecclesiastic, does little more than detail. One hundred churches,  well disciplined, acting  in  concert, with Christian  zeal,  piety,  humanity — frequently  meeting  together  in committees of ways and means for building up Zion, for fencing in the deserts, cultivating the enclosed fields, watering the dry and barren spots, striving together mightily in prayer, in preaching the word,  in  contributing  to  the  necessities  of  the  saints,  in enlightening the ignorant, and in devising all practicable ways of doing good — would, in a given period, do more than twice the same number  acting  in  their  individual  capacity,  without  concert, without co-operation, and that united energy, always the effect of intelligent and cordial combination. 

But, in order to this, Christians must regard the church, or body of Christ,  as  one  community,  though  composed  of  many  small communities, each of which is an organized member of this great national organization; which, under Christ, as the supreme and sole Head, King, Lord, and Lawgiver, has the conquest of the whole world in its prayers, aims, plans, and efforts. Hence, there must be such  an  understanding  and  agreement  between  these  particular congregations as will suffice to a recognition and approval of their several  acts;  so  that  the  members,  or  the  measures  of  one community shall be treated with the respect due to them at home, in whatever community they may happen to be presented. On this principle  only  can  any  number  of  independent  and  distinct communities of any sort — political, commercial, literary, moral, or religious — act in concert with mutual advantage to themselves, and with a proper reference to the general good. 

Any  one  who  seeks  apostolic  sanctions  for  these  view  of co-operation, will find ample authority in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles. Paul addresses "*all the saints* in Rome" in his Epistle to  the  Romans.  Now  in  Rome  there  were  sundry  churches,  as appears from chap. 16: 5, 10, 11, 14, 15. These all he addresses as one single community. Again he represents "all the churches of the Gentiles" as uniting in thanks to Priscilla and Aquila, 16: 4. He also represents "the churches of Christ" as uniting salutations by him to the Romans, ver. 16. In his letters to the Corinthians he addresses the church of Corinth, "All the saints which are in all Achaia," and "all them in every place who call upon the name of Jesus  Christ."  1  Cor.  1:2;  2  Cor.  1:1.  There  he  exhorts  to  "be perfectly  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and  in  the  same judgments."  1  Cor.  1:10.  "The  churches  in  Asia  united  in  their salutations to the Corinthians," chap. 16: 19. He speaks in the 2d Epistle of all the churches in Achaia, as "helping together in prayer for him" and his companions, and of their helping him on his way in the work of the Lord. In the 8th chapter he informs them of the grace of God bestowed on "all churches in Macedonia," evinced by the liberality of their united contributions to the saints. He also speaks of an equality in the mutual contributions of churches in one co-operation — and of a brother chosen by sundry communities to travel with the Apostles, 8: 14, 18, 19.; and of his accompanying brethren as "messengers of the churches." The whole 9th chapter of this epistle speaks of the co-operation of the churches in public contributions for common objects. Paul, and all the brethren with him, unite in the epistle to "all the churches in Galatia." These he commands to "bear one another's burdens, and thus to fulfil the law of Christ." But, indeed, all the *catholic epistles* are unequivocal proofs that co-operation is  of the very essence of the Christian institution. Such are some of Paul's epistles, both the epistles of Peter, the 1st of John, and that of James and Jude. The very basis of  such  general  or  universal  letters  is  the  fact,  that  all  the communities  of  Christ  constitute  but  one  body,  and  are individually  and  mutually  bound  to  co-operate  in  all  things pertaining to a common salvation. 

25. The Christian Ministry 

"He gave some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teachers for the perfecting of the saints for *the work of the ministry,* for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ," etc. For the  setting  up  of  the  Christian  institution  officers  extraordinary were needed. So was it in the Jewish, and so is it every institution, human  and  divine.  But  when  an  institution  is  set  up,  it  only requires an ordinary ministry or administration of its affairs. All the extraordinary gifts vouchsafed to Moses, and to the Apostles and  Prophets  of  the  gospel  institution,  ceased  when  these institutions were fully developed and established. Still a regular and  constant  ministry  was  needed  among  the  Jews,  and  is  yet needed  among  the  Christians;  and  both  of  these  by  divine authority. 

Natural gifts for a natural state of things, and supernatural gifts for a supernatural state of things, are, in the wisdom of both God and man, apposite and needful. Hence, even in the apostolic age, there were officers without, as well as with, miraculous endowments. "Having, then, gifts differing according to the office, or grace that is  given  to  us — if  prophecy,  let  us  prophesy  according  to  the measure of our faith; or ministry, let us attend on our ministering; he that teacheth, on teaching; he that exhorteth, on exhortation; he that distributeth, with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence." God has therefore conferred various gifts on the church for the effectual administration of its affairs. He has placed in it "*helps* and *governments,*" as well as Apostles and Prophets. 

The standing and immutable ministry of the Christian community is  composed  of  Bishops,  Deacons,  and  Evangelists.  Of  each  of these is but one order, though possessing great diversities of gifts. There  have  been  bishops,  deacons,  and  evangelists,  with  both ordinary and extraordinary gifts. Still the office is now, and ever was,  the  same.  In  ancient  times  official  and  unofficial  persons sometimes possessed miraculous gifts. Those in high office were also generally of those most eminently gifted with extraordinary powers. Superficial readers have, therefore, sometimes concluded that,  inasmuch  as  bishops,  deacons  and  especially  evangelists, frequently possessed these manifestations of the Holy Spirit, with the ceasing of those gifts, the offices themselves also expired. This is a great mistake. Officers there must be while there are offices, or services to be performed. So long as the human system needs sight, hearing, and feeling, there will be eyes, ears, and hands. So long also  as  the  Christian  body  is  an  organized  body,  having  many services to perform, it must have organs or officers by which to enjoy itself and operate on society. 

There  are,  indeed,  necessarily  as  many  offices  in  ever  body  as there are services to be performed to it, or by it. This is the root and reason of all the offices in all the universe of God. Our planet needs diverse celestial services to be performed to it. Hence, the sun, moon, and stars are celestial officers ministering to it. The eye,  the  ear,  the  tongue,  the  hand,  the  foot,  are,  for  the  same reason, officers in the human body, essentially serving it in its vital interests  and  enjoyments;  and  by  means  of  these  organs,  it performs important functions to other bodies. 

Experience,  as  well as  observation, has taught  us that "practice makes perfect," and that "whatever is every person's business is no person's  business."  Hence  arose  the  custom  among  men  of communicating  certain  offices  to  particular  individuals.  The philosophy of such elections and ordinances is found in the fact, that  special  services  are  best  performed  by  special  organs  or agents, whose special province and duty is to attend to them. 

As the Christian system is a perfect system, it wisely provides for its own perpetuity and prosperity by creating all necessary offices and filling them with suitable persons. We have said these offices are  three,  and  of  perpetual,  because  of  necessary  existence. *Bishops,* whose office it is to preside over, to instruct, and to edify the community — to feed the church of the Lord with knowledge and understanding — and to watch for their souls as those that must give account to the Lord at his appearing and his kingdom, compose the first  class.  *Deacons,*  or  servants — whether  called  treasurers, almoners,  stewards,  door-keepers,  or  messengers,  constitute  the second. For the term *deacon* originally included all public servants whatever,  though  now  most  commonly  confined  to  one  or  two classes; and improperly, no doubt, to those only who attend to the mere temporal interests of the community. They are distinguished persons,  called  and  commissioned  by  the  church,  (and consequently are always responsible to it,) to serve in any of these capacities.  Evangelists,  however,  though  a  class  of  public functionaries created by the church, do not serve it directly; but are by  it  sent  out  into  the  world,  and  constitute  the  third  class  of functionaries belonging to the Christian system. 

As there is more scrupulosity on some minds concerning the third class of Evangelists, than concerning either Bishops or Deacons, we shall take occasion to speak more explicitly and fully upon the nature and necessity, as well as upon the authority of this office. Evangelists,  as  the  term  indicates,  are  persons  devoted  to  the preaching of the word, to the making of converts, and the planting of  churches.  It  is,  indeed,  found  but  three  times  in  the  New Covenant; but the verb from which it comes — viz. to *evangelize,* is in some of its branches found almost sixty times in that volume. "To evangelize" and "to do the work of an evangelist" are phrases of  equal  import,  and  indicate  the  same  duties,  rights,  and privileges. 

Among the offices which were comprehended in the apostleship, none required more varied endowments than that of the Evangelist. The gift of tongues was amongst the qualifications necessary to those who, after the ascension, first undertook this work. But the qualifications for this office, so far as the gift of tongues or the knowledge of language is concerned, are not immutably fixed. It depends upon the field of labor which the Evangelist is to occupy, whether  he  must  speak  on  language  or  more.  His  work  is  to proclaim the word intelligibly and persuasively — to immerse all the believers, or converts of his ministry — and to plant and organize churches wherever he may have occasion; and then teach them to keep the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. 

Take, for example, the sketch given us by Luke of the labors of Philip the Evangelist, one of the first who wore that designation. One  of  the  seven  ministers  of  the  Jerusalem  church,  after  his diaconate was vacated  by the dispersion of that  community, he commenced  his  evangelical  labors.  He  turned  his  face  towards Samaria, and preached and baptized amongst the Samaritans: for, we are told, when the Samaritans believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God and the Lord Jesus, they were  baptized,  both  men  and  women.  He  also  converted  the Ethiopian Eunuch; and then, passing from Azotus, he "preached *in all the cities* till he came to Cesarea," where he afterwards resided. The next notice we have of him is found in Acts 21:8. "We," says Luke,  "who  were  of  Paul's  company,  departed,  and  came  into Cesarea, and entered into the house of Philip the Evangelist, one of the seven, and abode with him. He had four virgin daughters that did  prophesy."  Evident,  then,  it  is  that  he  obtained  the  title *Evangelist*  from  his  itinerant  labors  in  the  gospel  and  in  the converting of men. His possession of the gift of the Holy Spirit was no more peculiar to him as an evangelist, than as deacon of the church in Jerusalem; for while in the diaconate of that church he seems to have been as full of the Holy Spirit as when visiting all the cities from Azotus to Cesarea. 

Convening  converts  into  societies,  and  organizing  them  into worshipping assemblies, are inseparably connected with the right of converting them. Casually, in his letters to Timothy, Paul seems to define the work of an Evangelist. He says, "Preach the word; be instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and teaching; endure affliction; *do the work of an Evangelist;* fulfil thy ministry." "Let no man despise thy youth. Till I  come  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  exhortation,  to  teaching. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, according to prophecy — by the laying on the hands of the presbytery or eldership." "Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all: take heed to thyself and to thy teaching; continue in them: for in doing this, thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee."1 This seems to be the office of an Evangelist which the Lord gave the church after his ascension. 

Setting things in order in the churches — the committing the same office to  faithful  men,  who shall  be able to  instruct  others — the ordaining of elders, and a general superintendence of the affairs of churches, seem to have been also lodged in the hands of Timothy and Titus as agents of the Apostles. How far these works are yet necessary, and how far the superintendence of them may be safely lodged  in  the  hands  of  select  Evangelists  as  *respects  infant communities,*  may  be,  with  many  a  question  of  dubious interpretation.  But  that  Evangelists  are  to  separate  into communities their own converts, teach and superintend them till they  are  in  a  condition  to  take  care  of  themselves,  is  as unquestionably a part of the office of an Evangelist as praying, or preaching, or baptizing. 

But we shall be asked, 'Is not preaching and baptizing, and even teaching,  the  common  privilege  of  all  disciples,  as  they  have opportunity?' And we also ask in answer, 'Is it not the privilege of all fathers to teach their own children, and to preside over their own  families?'  But  who  will  thence  infer,  that  all  fathers  are teachers and presidents, does not more shock common sense, than he who infers that all disciples, as such, are evangelists, pastors, and teachers, because we concede that in certain cases it is the privilege of all citizens of Christ's kingdom to preach, baptize, and teach.  Every  citizen  of  Christ's  kingdom  has,  in  virtue  of  his citizenship, equal rights, privileges and immunities. So has every citizen of the United States. Yet  all citizens are not  legislators, magistrates, judges, governors, etc. Before any community, civil or religious,  is  organized,  every  man  has  equal  rights  to  do  what seemeth good in his own eyes. But when organized, and persons appointed  to  office,  then  whatever  rights,  duties,  privileges  are conferred on particular persons, cannot of right belong to those who have transferred them; any more than a person cannot both give and keep the same thing. 

But  there  are  some  duties  and  privileges  we  cannot  wholly communicate  to  others.  Parents  cannot  wholly  transfer  the education of their children to others; neither can a master transfer all his duties to a steward or overseer. No more can the citizens of Christ's kingdom wholly transfer their duties to preach and teach Christ. To enlighten the ignorant, to persuade the unbelieving, to exhort the disobedient when they fall in our way and we have the ability  or  the  opportunity,  is  an  intransferable  duty.  Even  the church  of  Rome,  with  all  her  clerical  pride,  commands  and authorizes  *lay  baptism,*  when  a  Priest  is  not  convenient.  A Christian is by profession a preacher of truth and righteousness, both by precept and example. *He may of right preach, baptize, and dispense  the  supper,  as  well  as  pray  for  all  men,  when circumstances  demand  it.*  This  concession  does  not,  however, either dispense with the necessity of having evangelists, bishops, and deacons; not, having them, does it authorize any individual to assume  to  do  what  has  been  given  in  charge  to  them.  Liberty without licentiousness, and government without tyranny, is the true genius of the Christian institution. 

While, then, the Christian system  allows every man "as he has received a gift to minister as a good steward of the manifold grace of  God,"  it  makes  provision  for  choosing  and  setting  apart qualified persons for all its peculiar services, necessary to its own edification and comfort, as well as to its usefulness in the world. It provides for its own perpetuity and its growth in the wisest and most  practical  manner.  Its  whole  wisdom  consists  in  four points: — 1st. It establishes the necessary offices for its perpetuity and  growth.  2d.  It  selects  the  best-qualified  persons  for  those offices.  3d.  It  consecrates  or  sets  those  persons  apart  to  those offices. 4th. It commands them to give themselves wholly to the work, that their improvement may keep pace with the growth of the  body,  and  be  apparent  to  all.  Can  any  person  point  out  an imperfection in this plan? — ! 

All its officers, whether for its services at home or abroad, when fully  proved,  are  to  be  formally  and  solemnly  set  apart  by  the imposition  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery  or  eldership  of  the church. The whole community chooses — the seniors ordain. *This is the apostolic tradition.* Let those unacquainted with the volume examine the apostolic law and usage; Acts 6:2-6. So the Christian system  in  its  elections  and  ordinations  began.  *It  is  immutable.* Therefore this system obtains in all cases. The qualifications for any office are always founded in the nature of the office. They are generally detailed, but not always, because the *work to be done* is the best guide in ascertaining the qualifications of the doer of it. 

We say the seniors of elders always ordain. Popery says, 'None but those on whom the apostolic hands have been laid can of right ordain.' *Such an idea is not in the Christian system.* The seniors always lay on hands, whether hands have been laid on them or not. This is true Protestantism. Better still, it is true Bibleism. *Nay, it is the Christian System.* The Apostles laid on hands because *seniors,* and not because *apostles.* This is the jet of a controversy of fifteen hundred  years'  standing.  It  has  been  very  generally,  almost universally  misstated  and  overlooked.  Protestants  are  as  much Papists  in  this,  as  the  Papists  are  Protestants  in  disowning Protestantism.  It  is  assumed  by  Romanists,  and  conceded  by Protestants, that "*holy hands*" are official hands by a *jure Divino.* They are sometimes, but not always. But *Christian elders,* (for I do not mean mere old men,) who have long walked in the ways of the Lord, have holy hands, and much more power with and from the Lord, then ever dwelt in any pontiff or pretended vicar of Christ, in twelve hundred and sixty years. 

In proof that seniors lay  on hands,  we appeal  to  the fact,  Acts 6:1-15 :, for the Apostles were the oldest converts in Jerusalem. We appeal also to the fact that the presbytery or eldership laid hands on Timothy, and gave him the gift or office of an evangelist. And  are  there  two  rules  of  ordination  in  one system!  Paul  and Barnabas,  though  *Apostles,*  were  themselves  ordained  by  the church  of  Antioch  by  its  presbytery.  Consequently,  *seniors  in Christ, as such,* can, of divine warrant, lay hands on any persons, for any office to which the church has elected them. It must be done also by prayer and fasting. See  Acts 6:6; Acts 13:3; Acts 14:23. 

Persons may be juniors in years and seniors in Christ. Timothy, says Paul, "*lay hands suddenly on no man.*" This implies that the ordained were juniors in the Lord; and until they had attained some character and standing as seniors, (even Timothy himself,) were not to consent to their ordination. Perhaps it may be necessary to say that classic presbytery and the presbytery of a single church are very  different  institutions.  The  Apostles  ordained  *elders*  (a presbytery) in every church. They did not make young men old, but set apart those that were seniors in the Lord to the office of overseers. They did not make juniors *seniors,* but they made elders *bishops.* 

The community, the church, the multitude of the faithful, are the fountain  of official power. This  power descends from  the body itself — not from its servants. Servants made by servants are servants of servants; and such are all the clergy of the Man of Sin. But the body of Christ, under him as its head, animated and led by his spirit, is the fountain and spring of all official power and privilege. How much surer and purer is ecclesiastic authority thus derived from Christ the head, immediately through his body, that when derived through a long, doubtful, corrupt dynasty of bishops or pontiffs! The church is the mother of all the sons and priests of God; and to look for authority to her servants or creatures, as do all sorts of Papists, whether Catholic or Protestant, is to worship and serve  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator — a  species  of  idolatry worthy only of the darkest night of the darkest day of the dark ages. 

But the church needs messengers for special occasions — not only her  stated  deacons  and  ministers,  but  ministers  extraordinary. These too are selected by the church or churches in a given district, and *commissioned by their letters.* They are not consecrated by imposition of hands, but *approved by letters* from the community. Are we asked for authority? We produce it with pleasure. 1 Cor. 16:3. is just to the point: "And," says Paul to the saints in Corinth, "when I come *whomsoever you shall approve by letters,* them will I send to bring your liberality to Jerusalem." This is the apostolic usage in such cases. In the second epistle Paul says, "We have sent Titus the brother (Luke, we opine) whose praise is in the gospel, (written  by  him,)  throughout  all  the  churches — who  was  also *chosen by the churches* to travel with us this bounty," etc. 

The  Christian  system  demands  for  its  perpetuity  and  for  its prosperity at home and abroad, bishops, deacons, and evangelists. Its bishops teach, preside, and execute the laws of Christ in all its convocations.  The  deacons,  a  large  and  diverse  class  of functionaries,  composed  of  stewards,  treasurers,  almoners, door-keepers, etc. as the case may require, wait continually upon its  various  services.  Its  evangelists,  possessed  of  proper qualifications, ordained and consecrated to the work of the Lord in converting sinners and  planting  churches, by  a presbytery, or a board of seniors competent to the prudent discharge of the duty, are  constantly  engaged  in  multiplying  its  members.  These ministers of the word are commanded to be wholly engrossed in this work, and consequently to be fully sustained by their brethren in it. They are held responsible to all the holy brethren, and to the Lord at his appearing and his kingdom, for the faithful discharge of that sacred trust confided in them. 

What  an efficient  institution is  that over which Christ presides, when well understood and fully carried out in all its details! With its bishops and deacons at home, and its evangelists abroad, wholly devoted to the faithful discharge of their respective trusts; men of experience, faith, piety, morality, full of zeal, energy, benevolence, co-operating with all similar institutions, supported by the prayers and free-will offerings of all the united people, having the love of God in their hearts, and heaven in their eye, what may they not achieve of glory to God, of good to men, and honor to themselves! Of such an army of the faith, in full operation and concert, it might indeed be asked, "Who is this that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, bright as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners!" 

**1** 1 Timothy 4; 2 Timothy 4

26. The Christian Discipline 

Members should be publicly received into all societies. They are so in the state. It is matter of record. When a person is regenerated, and desires to be enrolled among the disciples meeting in any one place, if his  confession to  salvation  or immersion  has not  been publicly known to the brethren, reason says those who have been privy to the fact, who can attest his confession, ought to introduce him to the congregation, and he ought to be saluted or received as such  by  the  brethren  with  whom  he  unites.  This  the  slightest attention to propriety, the reason and nature of things, fully and satisfactorily  demonstrate.  Letters  of  recommendation  are  the expedient which, in apostolic times, was substituted for this formal introduction, when a citizen of the kingdom visited any community where he was unknown personally to the brethren. 

A person cannot be under the oversight or under the discipline of a congregation,  unless  he  voluntarily  associate  with  the  brethren meeting in that place, and unless it be a matter of notoriety or of record among the brethren that he is one of them. There can be no formal exclusion if there be no formal reception. If there be no visible  and  formal  union,  there  can  be  no  visible  and  formal separation. In truth, there can be no discipline in any congregation, unless  it  be  an  organized  body;  and  no  body  can  be  organized unless it is known who are members of it. On a matter of such plain  common  sense  perception  we  have  seldom  thought  it necessary to say a word, and should not now have noticed it at all, had  we  not  found  some  societies  which  cannot  tell  their  own members, which  even hesitated about  the necessity of a  formal reception of any person into them, or of having it on record who belonged  to  them.  They  demanded  a  positive  commandment  or precedent  for  such  a  reception.  They  might  as  pertinently  have demanded  a  positive  commandment  for  persons  to  be  formally married before they could be recognized as husband and wife, as to ask  for  a  positive  commandment  for  one  of  the  most  common dictates of reason, though, indeed, every commandment addressed to  the Christian congregations  on  relative duties and privileges, assumes the principle that those who belong to  any society are known  to  each  other  to  belong  to  it,  else  they  could  not  even perform the first day to one another — they could not know when they were assembled — they could not "tarry for one another." 

Whether  there  shall  be  a  record  in  print,  in  writing,  or  on  the memory of all the congregation, is a question which must depend on circumstances. If all the members are blessed with infallible memories,  so  as  never  to  forget  who  are  members,  when  they became  such,  when  any  one  was  received,  when  any  one  was rejected — I say, if every brother and sister can so well remember these matters, as, when the discipline of the congregation or any particular  question  respecting  any  case  of  discipline  may  arise, they can infallibly remember all about it; then, and in that case, it is  unnecessary  to  have  any  record,  church  book,  secretary,  or anything  written  or  printed.  But  if  otherwise,  there  must  be  a record;  because  questions  involving  peace  and  good  order  of society  may  arise,  and  have  arisen,  which  require  infallible testimony, or the most satisfactory evidence on questions of fact; such as, Was A B ever a member of your community? When did he become a member of it? When was he excluded? When was he restored? When did he forsake the assembly of the brethren? Was he a husband at the time of his removal? etc.  

Two things are paramount in all cases of discipline before brought into the congregation — *the Fact and the Law.* The fact is always to be  established  by  good  testimony  or  by  the  confession  of  the transgressor. The thing said to have been done, or the fact being established, the next question is, *What is the law in the case?* The president of the congregation states the fact proved, and lays the law before the brethren. They are to be judges both of the fact and the law, and when both are clearly propounded the questions is put. The congregation decides. — This is the oracle of reason — of civil law in all civilized countries; and it is the oracle of the Savior and his Apostles. Private offences, public offences, and those that are mixed, are to be decided according to what is written in the Book. This  must  be  known;  therefore,  after  the  formation  of  a congregation,  the  first  lessons  to  be  learned  are  those  which concern the relative duties of the brethren; and discipline amongst these first lessons stand conspicuous. It is too late to have to learn the law after a case occurs. When there are no cases of discipline in a congregation, then is the time for the brethren to be taught the will  of  the  Lawgiver,  that  they  may  be  prepared  to  act  with promptness and prudence when required. 

"Offences must come;" and, if possible, they must be healed. To cut off an offender, is good; to cure him, is better; but to prevent him falling, is best of all. The Christian spirit and system alike inculcate  vigilance  in  preventing;  all  expedition  in  healing offences; and all firmness in removing incorrigible offenders. Its disciplinary code is exceedingly simple, rational, and benevolent. It teaches us to regard all offences as acts of impiety, or acts of immorality; sins against our brethren, or sins against God alone; the omission of right, or the commission of wrong. 

Trespasses against our brethren are all matters of aggression upon their  persons,  property,  or  character.  They  are  either  private  or public. We can only offend against the person, the property, or the character  of  a  brother;  and  we  can  do  this  only  privately  or publicly.  Christ's  legislation  on  private  or  personal  offences,  as recorded in the 18th chapter of Matthew, commends itself to the approbation of Jew and Gentile all over the world. It is as plain and as excellent as his golden rule of moral feeling. 

Without giving any rules to decide who is the aggressor, or the aggrieved, allowing either of the parties to view the matter as he pleases, he commands him that supposes himself to be aggrieved to go to the aggressor and tell him his fault privately. If restitution is  made  and  reconciliation  effected,  the  matter  ends.  If  not,  he takes with him a second or a third person, states the facts of the case,  reasons  and  remonstrates.  If  this  also  fails,  then  he  is commanded  to  inform  the  church  of  the  matter;  and  if  the aggressor will not hear the church, then he is to be as a heathen man or a publican. 

Some, indeed, imagine a difficulty in this case; for after "*tell*" there is  no  *it*  in  the  original;  and  ask,  '*What  is  to  be  told  to  the church — the original fault,* or *simply that the aggressor will not make restitution?*' The most natural construction of the sentence favors the simple statement of the fact — that an offence had been committed and restitution refused, without going into the details of the trespass. But  a second difficulty has been suggested on the manner in which the congregation is to be informed. Is it to be told to  the  whole  community  in  full  assembly  met?  or  to  those appointed by the congregation to hear and adjudicate such matters? Certainly the congregation has ears as well as a tongue, and it is not all ears nor all tongue. Every well-organized church has its eldership, who hear all such matters, and who bring them before the whole assembly only when it is absolutely necessary, and even then at a convenient season. 

The elders hear the matter; and if the case be one that requires a special committee, which Paul calls "secular seats of judicature," 1 Cor. 6:4. they appoint it; then, and not till then, if their decision of the matter be refused, they bring it before the whole congregation, and he is excluded from among them, that he may be as a heathen man and a publican — one entitled only to civil, and not to Christian respect — one whose company is to be eschewed rather than courted. 

The whole community can act, and ought to act, in receiving and in excluding  persons:  but  in  the  aggregate,  it  can  never  become judges  of  offences  and  a  tribunal  trial.  Such  an  institution  was never set up by divine authority. No community is composed only of  wise  and  discreet  full  grown  men.  The  Christian  church engrosses old men, young men, and babes in Christ. Shall the voice of a babe be heard, or counted as a vote in a case of discipline! What is the use of bishops in a church, if all are to rule — of judges, if  all  are  judges  of  fact  and  law!  No  wonder  that  broils  and heart-burnings, and scandals of all sorts disturb these communities ruled by a democracy of the whole — where every thing is to be judged  in  public  and  full  assembly.  Such  is  not  the  Christian system. It ordains that certain persons shall judge and rule,1 and 

that all things shall "be done decently and in order." 

Besides  matters  of  private  trespass  between  brethren,  there  are matters of public wrong, or acts of injustice towards the whole Christian  community,  and  also  towards  them  that  are  without. Drunkenness in a professor, for example, is a sin against God and against  all  the  Christian  brotherhood.  It  is,  moreover,  a  public nuisance  to  all  men,  so  far  as  it  is  witnessed  or  known.  The transgressor in such a case, if he be not penitent and reform, must be convicted of the offence. An attempt at convicting him of the offence is not to be made till he fail to acknowledge it. A failure to acknowledge,  or  an  attempt  to  deny,  calls  for  conviction,  and precludes the idea of repentance. 

In all cases of conviction the church is to be addressed through its rulers.  No  private  individual  has  a  right  to  accuse  any  person before  the  whole  community.  The  charge,  in  no  case,  is  to  be preferred  before  the  whole  congregation.  Such  a  procedure  is without  precedent  in  the  Law  or  in  the  Gospel — in  any  well regulated society, church, or state. If, then, any brother fall into any public offence, those privy to it notify the elders of the church, or those for the time being presiding over it, of the fact, and of the evidence on which they rely. The matter is then in the hands of the proper persons. They prosecute the investigation of it; and on the denial of the accused, seek to convict him of the allegation. 

When a person is convicted of any offence, he is unworthy of the confidence of the brethren; for conviction supposes concealment and denial; and these, of course, are evidence of impenitence. We do not say that such a one is never again to be worthy of such confidence;  but  that  until  he  has  given  satisfactory  proofs  of genuine repentance, he is to be treated as one not of the body of Christ. 

In all case of hopeful repentance the transgressor is to be restored with  admonition.  The  acknowledgment  of  an  offence,  and  of repentance for it, are, in all cases, to be as public as the sin itself. Peter's  sin  and  repentance  are  as  public  as  his  name.  So  was David's. So should be those of all transgressors. Those who have caused  the  Savior  and  his  faithful  followers  to  blush,  ought themselves  to  be  made  to  blush  before  the  world;  and  if  their sorrow and amendment be genuine, they will do it cheerfully and fully. "Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear." 1 Tim. 5:20.2 

On  the  subject  of  *exclusion,*  or  what  is  commonly  called *excommunication,* which places the subject of it in the attitude of a pagan  or  publican  to  the  whole  Christian  community,  all  the Protestant sects seem to be of one mind. The Baptist Discipline, appended to the Confession of Faith taken from the works of Dr. John  Owen,  Dr.  Goodwin,  and  other  Congregationalists  and Independents, speaks in full harmony with our views — 9th edition, 1798, p. 20. — "The manner of proceeding unto this great and awful instituted  ordinance,  is,  the  church  being  gathered  together,  the offender  also  having  notice  to  come  to  make  his  answer  and defence (if he comes not, he aggravates his offence by despising the authority of Christ in his church) the body of the church is to have knowledge of the offender's crime fully, and the full proof thereof  as  of  plain  matter  of  fact;  and  after  mature  deliberate consideration, and consulting the rules of direction given in the word  of  God,  whether  the  offender  be  present  or  absent,  the minister or elder puts the question to the whole church, whether they judge the person guilty of crime now proved upon him, is worthy of the censure of the church for the same? To which the members  in  general  give  their  judgment;  which,  it  be  in  the affirmative, then the judgment of the members in general being had, or the majority of them, the pastor, minister, or elder, sums up the sentence of the church, opens the nature of the crime, with the suitableness of the censure, according to gospel rule; and having thus  proceeded,  a  proper  time  is  fixed  to  put  the  sentence  in execution;  at  which  time  the  pastor,  minister,  or  elder  of  the church,  as  his  place  and  duty  require,  is  to  lay  open  the heinousness of such a sin, with all the aggravating circumstances thereof, and showing what an abominable scandal such an offender is become to religion, what dishonor it is to God, etc. applying the particular places of scripture that are proper to the case, in order to charge the offence home upon the conscience of the offender, if present, that others also may fear; showing also the awful nature of this great censure, and the main end thereof, for the salvation and not the destruction of the soul, and with much solemnity in the whole society, calling upon God for his gracious presence, and his blessing upon this his sacred ordinance, that the great end thereof may be obtained. Still expressing the deep sense the church hath of the fall of this brother, with the great humiliation of the church, and great sorrow for, and detestation of, the sin committed. The said pastor, minister, or elder, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, in the presence of the congregation, and by and with the consent, and according to the judicial sentence of the church, cuts off, and secludes  such  an  offender  by  name,  both  from  the  union  and communion of the church, because of his offences; so that such a person is not thenceforth to be looked on, deemed, or accounted as a brother or member of such a church, until God shall restore him again by repentance." 

Whether it may be always prudent in the incipient stages of every case of discipline to have open doors, or whether some cases may not require closed doors, are questions referred to human prudence; but in the case of the ultimate decision of the congregation, and in that of exclusion, there can be but one opinion on the necessity and utility of its being done in the presence of all who may please to attend. 

1 1 Tim. 3:5; 1 Tim. 5:17. Acts 20:28-31. Heb. 13:17, etc. etc.  

2 By a reference to an Extra on ORDER, published 1835, the curious reader may find other useful hints on the subject of discipline.  

27. Expediency 

"All  things  lawful  are  not  expedient,  because  all  things  lawful edify not." So Paul substantially affirmed. A position of licentious tendency,  if  not  well  qualified.  As  defined  by  its  author,  it  is perfectly safe. He only assumed that there were manythings which he might lawfully do, which were not *expedient* for him to do. He might, for example, have married a wife, eat the flesh of either Jewish or Pagan sacrifices, or drunk the wine of their libations, etc. etc. according to the Christian law; but in the circumstances of his peculiar vocation and localities, to have done these things would have been inexpedient.  

Law itself is, indeed, at best but an expedient — a means, supposed at the time of its promulgation, suitable to some rational end. But, owing to the mutability of things, laws often fail to be the best means to the ends proposed; and are therefore abolished, or, for the time  being,  suspended.  This  is  true  of  all  laws  and  institutions prescribing the *modes* and *forms* of action, whether in religion or morality. Moral laws, properly so called, are, indeed, immutable; because the principle of every moral law is *love,* and that never can cease to be not only a way and means, but the *only way and means,* to  rational,  to  human  happiness.  Positive  precepts,  however, prescribing  the  *forms*  of  religious  and  moral  action,  emanating from God himself, have been changed, and may again be changed, while  all  the  elements  of  piety  and  morality  are  immutable.  It would now, for example, be immoral to marry a natural sister; yet it was for a time done by divine authority. It became inexpedient to continue the practice, and the law was changed. 

There is, therefore, *a law of expediency,* as well as the expediency of law. This law of expediency, as it is, indeed, the basis of the expediency of law in the divine government, has been, as in the case of David eating the loaves of the presence, and the priests profaning the Sabbath by the labors of the Temple, occasionally elevated above the precepts that prescribe the forms of religious and moral action. True, indeed, that such cases are exceedingly rare; and they are rare reasoners who can safely decide when any particular precept prescribing the *form* of action, may, for the sake of  the  action  itself,  be  waived  or  suspended.  It  is,  moreover, exceedingly  questionable,  whether,  under  the  more  perfect institution of Christianity, the law of expediency can ever clash with any moral or religious precept in the New Covenant. 

Still there are manythings left to the law of expediency, concerning which no precepts are found in the apostolic writings. To ascertain these is the object of this chapter. They are, then, in one sentence, those  things,  or  forms  of  action,  which  it  was  impossible  or unnecessary to reduce to special precepts; consequently they are not faith, piety, nor morality; because whatever is of the faith, of the worship, or of the morality of Christianity, was both possible and  necessary  to  be  promulged;  and  is  expressly  and  fully propounded in the sacred scriptures. The laws of expediency, then, has no place in determining the articles of faith, acts of worship, nor principles of morality. All these require a "*thus saith the Lord*" in express statements, and the sacred writings have clearly defined and  decided  them.  But  in  other  matters  that  may  be  called  the circumstantials  of  the  gospel  and  of  the  church  of  Christ,  the people of God are left to their own discretion and to the facilities and exigencies of society. 

Manythings, indeed, that are of vital importance to the well-being and prosperity of the kingdom  of Christ, are left to  the law of expediency. A few examples will suffice: — Can any one imagine any measure of more consequence than the safe-keeping of the apostolic writings, the multiplication of copies, the translation of them into different languages, and the mode of distributing them throughout the whole world? Now, who can show a positive or special precept on any one of these four vital points? Scribes or copyists, paper-makers, printers, book-binders, and venders of the oracles of God, are as unknown to the apostolic writers as mails, post-offices, rail-roads, and steam-engines. So negligent, too, has the kingdom of Christ been on some of these points, that she has not  at  this  hour  a  *received  copy*  of  the  Living  Oracles.  We American and English people have a *received version* by authority of a king; but we have not a **received original** by the authority of any king or government civil or ecclesiastic. A startling fact, truly! But who dares to deny it? 

Next to these are meeting-houses, baptisteries, Lord's tables, the emblematic loaf and cup, times of convocation, arrangements for the  day,  etc.  etc.  Acts  of  Parliament,  decrees  of  synods  and councils, but no apostolic enactments, statutes, or laws, are found for  any  of  these  important  items.  There  is  neither  precept  nor precedent in the New Testament for building, hiring, buying, or possessing a meeting-house; for erecting a baptismal bason, font, or bath; for chancel, altar, table, leavened or unleavened bread, chalice, cup, or tankard, and many other things of equal value. 

There is no law, rule, or precedent for the *manner* of eating the Lord's supper, no hint as the quantity of bread and wine to be used by each participant; nothing said about who shall partake first, or how  it  shall  be  conveyed  from  one  to  another.  These  are  all discretionary matters, and left to the prudence and good sense of the  Christian  communities — in  other  words,  to  the  law  of expediency. 

Touching  these  and  very  many  other  such  matters  and  things, nothing is enacted, prescribed, or decided by apostolic authority; but all the things to be done are enjoined in the very clear and broad precepts, or in very striking and clear apostolic precedents. General laws and precepts, embracing the whole range of religious and moral action, are often found in the sayings of the Lord and his ministers of the New Institution, from which also our duties and obligations  may  be  clearly  ascertained.  That  "marriage  is honorable in all" is clearly taught; but who ever read a verse on the *manner* in which the most important of all social institutions is to be performed? No age is fixed at which the covenant shall be made or  ratified — on  time  of  life  prescribed  for  its consummation — nothing said about who shall perform the service, the formula, the witnesses, the record, etc. And, still more singular, there is no table, no law, or statute in all the New Covenant saying who may, or who may not, enter into that relation on any principle of consanguinity or affinity. By the consent of the Christian church the Jewish law obtains in this matter. 

The  communion  of  saints,  of  all  Christian  churches — the co-operation of churches as one holy nation, a kingdom of priests, as  a  peculiar  people  in  all  common  interests  and  benefits — an efficient  gospel ministry, supported justly and honorably by the whole  community — are  matters  clearly  and  fully  taught  by  both apostolic precept and authority; but the forms, the ways and means by  which  these  ends  shall  be  attained,  are  left  to  the  law  of expediency. 

But here arises a practical and all-important question, viz. — *Who shall ascertain and who shall interpret this law of expediency?* We all agree that expedients are to be chosen with regard to times, seasons, and other circumstances. Changes in these must always change expedients. The mariner's compass, the art of printing, new modes of travelling, Banks and their commercial operations, new forms of government, etc. etc. have changed the order of society and all human expedients. Now the law of expediency is the law of adopting the best present means of attaining any given end. But this is a matter which the wisdom and good sense of individuals and communities must decide. This is not, this cannot be, a matter of standing revelation. Now if the church was always unanimous in opinion  as  in  faith — if  all  the  accumulated  wisdom  gave  one uniform decision on all such questions, then the whole church is by one voice to ascertain the law of expediency on any given point. But  this  is  not  the  case.  No  class  of  men — apostles,  teachers, privates,  ever  did  agree  on  questions  of  expediency.  Paul  and Barnabas  dissented  and  differed,  *without  any  breach  of communion,* on a question of this sort. Hence arises the necessity of  the  spirit  of  concession,  subordination,  bearing,  forbearing submitting to one another. When there are two views or opinions on any question of expediency entertained by two parties, one of them must yield, or there are two distinct systems of operation, and ultimately two distinct parties. According to the law of expediency, then, the minors in age, experience, or numbers, must give place to the majors in  age, experience, or numbers. But as numbers are supposed to represent the ratios of age, wisdom, and knowledge, it is  expedient  that  a  clearly  ascertained  majority  of  those  whose province  it  is  to  decide  any  matter,  shall  interpret  the  law  of expediency; or, in other words, the minority shall peaceably and cordially acquiesce in the decisions of the majority. Since the age of  social  compacts  began  till  now,  no  other  principle  of co-operation, no other law of expediency, can secure the interests, the union, harmony, and strength of any people, but that of the few submitting to the many. 

He that asks of unanimity asks for what is not often attainable in a small number of persons. He asks for the liberty of one or two to govern or to control a whole community — for the government of a minority, however small, over a majority, however large. This is virtually,  though  not  formally,  and  not  often  intentionally,  the demand  of  all  the  advocates  of  unanimity  in  ascertaining  or interpreting the law of expediency in any given case. The law of expediency enacts that a majority of the seniors shall decide in all cases what is most expedient to be done in attaining any of the ends commanded in the Christian Institution, the means to which are not divinely ordained in the written laws of that institution; and that the minority shall cheerfully and conscientiously acquiesce in such decisions. 

*The  law  of  love  is  the  supreme  law  of  religion,  morality,  and expediency. No code of laws, without it, could make or keep any people pure, peaceable, and happy; and, with it, we only want, in most matters, but general laws.* — This is the spirit, and soul, and body of the Christian Institution. We cannot love by law, but we can walk in love with no other law but that of love. The Christian system contemplates love as supreme, and makes no arrangements nor  provisions  for  keeping  together  a  carnal,  worldly,  selfish, self-willed population. Better such a confederacy had burst into as many particles as persons, by the repellent principle of selfishness, than to be hooped together by all the laws of expediency from Noah to John Wesley. 

28. Heresy 

Schisms  and  heresies  are  matters  strongly  reprobated  in  the Christian Scriptures. That they may be guarded against with due care, they must be contemplated and understood in their true and proper  scriptural  attributes.  We  shall  therefore  first  attempt  to define them. 

The term *schism* is found but *eight* times in the apostolic writings. When applied to a garment, Matt. 9:16. Mark 2:21. it is properly translated *rent;* applied to a concourse of people, John 7:43; 9:16; 10:19, it is translated *division;* when applied to the church by Paul, 1 Cor. 1:10; 11:18; 12:25. it denotes *division* or *alienation* — not on account of faith, doctrines, or opinions — but on account of men as leaders or chiefs among the brethren. So the connections in which it is found always  indicate.  It  is  a division  as  respects  *internal union,* or the union of heart and affection, only tending to a breach of  visible  or  outward  union,  and  therefore  reprobated  by  the Apostle. Such are its New Testament acceptations. 

Schisms may then exist where there is the most perfect agreement in faith, in doctrine, in all religious tenets. Undue attachment to certain  persons,  to  the  disparagement  of  others,  partial  regards because of personal preferences, are the true elements of schism or division as it appeared in Corinth, and as the word is used in the New  Testament.  But  few  persons,  now-a-days,  can  correctly appreciate  the  force  of  the  word  *schisms*  in  the  apostolic  age, because but a very few experimentally know the intimacies, the oneness  of  heart  and  soul,  that  obtained  and  prevailed  in  the Christian profession, while all was genuine and uncorrupt. A union formed on Christian principles — a union with Christ and his people, in  views,  sentiments,  feelings,  aims,  and  pursuits — a  real co-partnery for eternity, almost annihilated individuality itself, and inseparably cemented into one spirit all the genuine members of Christ's body. Kindred drops do not more readily mingle into one mass, than flowed the souls of primitive Christians together in all their  aspirations,  loves,  delights,  and  interests.  Hence  arose  the jealousy in the Apostle Paul when first he learned that particular persons  in  Corinth  began  to  attract  to  themselves  notice  and attachment  for  mere  personal,  individual,  and  fleshly considerations, as leaders or chiefs in the Christian family. In these indications he already saw the dissolution of the church. Although yet but one visible community, having one Lord, one faith, one baptism,  one  table,  one  ostensible  supreme  and  all-controlling interest; still, in these attachments to particular persons he not only saw  a  real  division  or  breach  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  but foresaw that it would issue in positive, actual, and visible disunion or heresy. And here we are led to inquire into the scriptural import of the word *heresy.* 

*Hairesis,*  strictly  and  literally  indicative  of  *choice*  or  *option,*  is anglicised *heresy,* and properly rendered *sect* or *faction,* and by implication *discord* and *contention.* It is found only *nine* times in the New Testament. In the Acts 5: 17, we have it rendered "the sect of the Sadducees;"—Acts 15:5 "the sect of the Pharisees;"—Acts 24:5,  "the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes;"—Acts  24:14,  "after  the  way which they call *heresy* (sect,) so worship I," says Paul; — Acts 26:5, "after the most strict *sect* of our religion I lived a Pharisee;"—Acts 28:22.  "as  for  this  *sect*  (of  the  Christians)  we  know  that  it  is everywhere spoken against." Besides these six occurrences we find it twice used by Paul in his epistles, and once by Peter. 1 Cor. 11:19. "For there must be *heresies* (sects) among you." Gal. 5:20. "Sedition,  heresies."  2  Peter  2:1.  "Shall  bring  in  damnable heresies." In the common version it is, then, five times rendered *sect,* and four times *heresy.* 

As the word *sect* or *heresy,* found only in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles, does not always in the former simply mean a *party,* without any regard to its tenets, the term has nothing in it either reproachful or honorable — nothing virtuous or vicious. Hence it is equally applied to Pharisees, Sadducees, Nazarenes, or Christians, without any insinuation as the character of the party. It is only once rendered  *heresy*  in  the  "Acts,"  and  in  that  place  it  ought  most obviously to have been *sect.* Paul had been accused by Tertullus (Acts 24:6.) with the crime of being "a ringleader of the *sect* of the Nazarenes." Now in vindicating himself from any censure in this case, he ought to have met the charge under the same title. This he did in the original; for in verse 5th, in the indictment, and in verse 14th,  in  his  defence,  we  have  the  same  word  *hairesis.*  How injudicious,  then,  was  it  on  the  part  of  our  translators  and  the Vulgate to make Tertullus accuse Paul of a *sect,* and to make Paul defend himself of a *heresy,* when both Tertullus and Paul used the same word in their speeches as reported by Luke in the original! 

In the new version this word is, as it should be, uniformly rendered *sect.* In the Epistles, and apparently once in  Acts, it is used as though it included an idea of censure or guilt. Paul defends himself from  the  accusation  of  Tertullus.  Here,  then,  a  question arises — "Why  should  the  term  *hairesis*  import  blame  in  its *Christian,* and none in its *Jewish* acception! We answer, Because among  the  Jews  sects  or  parties  did  not  terminate  as  among Christians,  in  separate  communities  or  communions.  They resembled  the  high  and  low  church  parties  in  the  Episcopalian communion;  or  the  different  and  numerous  sects  among  the Romanists,  viz. — Benedictines,  Franciscans,  Dominicans,  Jesuits, etc.  which  never  terminate  in  a  breach  of  communion  or co-operation  as  one  church.  Thus  the  Pharisees,  Sadducees, Herodians, etc. frequented the same temple, altar, priesthood, and united  in  all  the  same  acts  of  worship.  Not  so  the  Jews  and Samaritans:  they  were  real  *sects*  in  the  Christian  sense.  Again, among the Jews the bond of union was national and fleshly; and, therefore, parties could not destroy it. With us it is spiritual, social, cordial — one faith, one hope, one spirit; and parties are destructive in the superlative degree. 

To this view there is but one plausible objection; and that we meet in the answer to the question, '*Why did Paul defend himself from the accusation of Tertullus as indicating censure, if sects among the Jews were such harmless and inoffensive things?*' We answer, There is no blame in the simple imputation of a sect, but in the ideas which Tertullus connected with it. The Romans had agreed to protect the Jews in the enjoyment of their religion, and they wished in the presence of Felix to make Paul appear an apostate from that religion — "a pestilent fellow, a mover of *sedition,* a ringleader of the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes" — that  he  might  be  from  under  the protection granted to the Jews' religion. From this view only can we see the wisdom of  Paul's  defence. He admits the charge of being a *sectary,* but in no criminal sense — worshipping the same God  with  them,  believing  also  every  word  in  their  law  and Prophets,  and  cherishing  the  same  hope  of  a  future  life  in  the resurrection of the dead; and thus evinces that nothing offensive or criminal  could  be  imputed  to  him  on  account  of  his  being  a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 

In the Christian epistles it is, however, used in a bad sense, and is always connected with censure. This may have been the reason why King James' version changes the translation into *heresies,* or as  in  the  case  of  *baptism,  bishop,*  etc.  anglicises  rather  than translates the word. It is not, however, a good or sufficient reason, because it necessarily imposes upon the English reader that *heresy* in the epistles, and *sect* in the Acts of the Apostles, are two distinct and different things; and this, of course, not only obscures those passages,  but  also  prevents  the  clear  intelligence  of  a  matter essential to our duty and our happiness. The acceptation, however, is not materially different in the epistles, except in the relation of things. When the word *sect* is connected with a proper name, such as the *sect* of the Pharisees, the *sect* of the Sadducees, or the *sect* of the Christians, it is used in a middle sense, neither as intimating truth or error, good or evil; but if it be applied to a party formed in a  community  which  admits  of  no  division  or subdivision  in  its nature,  because  necessarily  tending  to  its  corruption  and destruction; then, in that relation and sense, a sect is a destructive and condemnable thing. Now in the Epistles it is always taken in this sense, and is  ranked with  *factions,*  as a work of the flesh, carnal and destructive, and doomed to the judgments of Heaven. 

Still, in its scriptural application, whether used by Luke, Paul, or Peter and it is found in no other writer, it never relates to doctrine, tenet, opinion, or faith. There is not, in sacred usage, any *tenet,* or *doctrine,* which is called *heresy* or *sect.* Hence that ecclesiastical definition, viz. — "*Heresy denotes some erroneous opinion, tenet, or doctrine obstinately persisted in,*" is without any countenance from the New Testament. *Heresy* and *heretical,* in the lips of Paul and Peter,  and  in  the  lips  of  an  ancient  or  modern  schoolman,  or churchman, are to very different things.  

But some allege that any doctrine that makes division is heretical, and therefore condemnable. It may be admitted, for the sake of argument,  that  any  doctrine  or  action  that  makes  division  is heretical or divisive; but on this account it is not condemnable; because in that sense Jesus Christ was a heretic and his gospel heresy: for he came to make divisions on earth, and did make a sect; and of course, his doctrine is divisive or heretical. 

Now if we say Jesus was a *heretic,* and his gospel *heresy,* and his followers *sectaries,* does not this divest the word of any bad or culpable significance, and make both heretics, heresies, and sects innocent things! It does, so far as all without Christ's kingdom or institution are concerned. But this is the all-important difference in this place; Christians, contradistinguished from Jews, Mussulmen, Pagans, Infidels, are lawfully, righteously, and innocently a sect, a heresy: but a sect among these is corrupt, treasonable, and most reprehensible, according to every precept, doctrine, and saying of the New Institution. Thus a man may be a Christian, or of the sect of the Nazarenes, but not a Lutheran, a Calvinist, an Arminian, without blame. 

The words *schisms* and *heresy* so far explained, may we not regard schism as the cause, and heresy as the effect? or, in other words, must we not regard sects as the effects of schisms? The philosophy of  the  whole  matter,  then,  is,  that  separation  is  the  effect  of alienation of heart, alienation the fruit of rival attachments, which in the church generally begin in personal sympathies or personal antipathies, and end in detaching the subjects of them from the body of Christ. In this view of the matter Paul seems to reason, 1 Cor. 11:18-19. — "There are *schisms* among you — for there must be *sects* among you, that the approved may be made manifest." The schisms  in  Corinth  began  in  particular  predilections  for  great teachers;  such  as  Paul,  Apollos,  Cephas.  These  preferences violated that *unity of spirit,* that oneness of heart essential to one body in Christ; and that led to parties in the church, displayed in the manner they celebrated the supper. The same spirit in other communities ultimately led to visible separations and distinct sects, as among the professed members of Christ's body at the present day. 

Paul, in commenting on this most ancient schism, further observes, that there *must,* of necessity, be sects in such a state of things, that "the *approved* may be made manifest." So true it is that all strifes, contentions, parties, and sects grow out of corruption. Sects are the egress  of  corruptions.  The  approved  hold  to  Christ,  and  thus become manifest; the disapproved follow human leaders, and are also made manifest. There appears no other cure for a corrupt and mixed  community  than  heresies  or  sects.  It  is  as  wise  and benevolent  a  provision  in  a  remedial  system,  that  incurable corruption should work out in this way, as that law in the animal kingdom which forces to the surface all unfriendly humors, and congregates into swellings and biles those vicious particles which would otherwise vitiate the whole system, and fatally terminate in the ruin of the body. 

Men, indeed, do not fall in love with Paul, Peter, and Cephas, in the partizan sense, till they have lost some of their love for Christ. Hence  the  first  indication  of  personal  regards,  or  of  sectarian attachment,  is  the  first  proof  of  declension,  backsliding,  or apostasy. The partizan attachment is of the essence of the first sin, and carries deeply concealed in its core the first element of hatred. Thus  we  observe  that  he  loves  that  Wesley  for  any  sectarian attribute, hates Calvin just in ratio of his attachment to his leader; as  he  who  loves  Calvin  for  his  humanisms  hates  Wesley  for opposing them. While he that loves only what is Christian in the two,  in  no  sense  hates  either;  but  grieves  for  the  errors  and delinquencies  of  both.  If  for  no  other  reason,  we  ought  most devoutly and ardently to eschew partyism; for this it ought to be abjured, viz. — that our hatred of one party will always be in the ratio of our love for its antagonist; and in all such cases both our love and our hatred are obnoxious to the reprobation of God, and lie, indeed, under the doom of his express condemnation. 

On this account we presume it is that the next place we find this word *hairesis,* and the only time it is again found in Paul's epistles, it stands immediately after "*factions*" and before "*envyings*" and "*murders,*" in Paul's enumeration and classification of the works of the flesh, Gal. 5:20-21. the perpetrators of which Paul strongly and repeatedly affirmed, shall not "enter into the kingdom of God." He says,  "The  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are these — fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, sorcery, enmities, strifes,  emulations,  wraths,  brawlings,  *factions,  sects,*  envyings, murders, intoxication," etc. etc. Every sectary is, then, Paul being in the chair of judgment, a fleshly man, and without the precincts of the kingdom of God. A severe judgment, truly! How shall we understand it? — ! 

It is now still more evident that *heresies* are not mere opinions, tenets, doctrines, or theories; for who will affirm that opinions, tenets, or theories, as such, are works of the flesh? Or who will say that fleshly principles are the roots or reasons of mere opinions, tenets, or theories, etc.? Corrupt opinions, indeed, may be more naturally  propagated  or  received  by  corrupt  men;  but  to  make opinions or tenets, even those sectarian opinions on which some parties  are  founded,  works  of  the  flesh,  is  to  confound  mental imbecility or a defective education, with depravity of heart; for nothing can be called a work of the flesh that partakes not of the corruptions of the heart. *Hairesis* in this place, then, means sects, as it always does in the New Testament. 

Still the question recurs, Are all religious sects works of the flesh? Paul  makes  no  exceptions.  We  dare  not.  He  speaks  not  of philosophic, political, or foreign factions and sects; but of those appertaining  to  the  Christian  institution.  Among  the  Jews  Paul himself  was  a  *Pharisee;*  among  the  political  castes  he  was  a *Roman;*  but  in  religion  he  was  a  Christian;  not  a  Calvinist, Arminian, or Methodist; but a Christian. Indeed, Paul himself, in his history of sectaries, or of the founders and makers of religious parties, traces all their zeal and effort to the stomach, rather than to the conscience, or love of truth. "Mark them," says he, "who cause divisions and offences  contrary to  the doctrine which  you have received, and avoid them; for such persons do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own *belly;* and by flattery and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple." Surely such sectaries and sects are "the works of the flesh." 

But here we ought to define a *factionist* and a *sectary,* since now a days we have some sectarians that are not factionists, and some factionists  and  factions  that  are  more  than  mere  sectaries.  The factionist, or as Paul calls him, the "heretic," makes the faction. The faction are those who take part with him. While the ordinary sectaries are those who are simply led by the heretic, beguiled by his  flatteries  and  fair  speeches,  without  any  sinister  motive impelling  their  course.  There  are  many  sectarians  who,  in  the simplicity of their hearts, imagine their party to be the true and only church of Christ, and therefore conscientiously adhere to it. There are others who think that no party is the church of Christ, but that he has a church in all parties — an invisible church — to which they think themselves to belong, and therefore fraternize with all of a similar stamp in all parties so far as known to them. These differ much from the schismatics, heretics, and factionists of Paul. Those either made, or labored to keep up, a party or a sect; and all such persons are corrupt fleshly men; because, from pride of their own opinion, from emulation, ambition, or the love of money, they are prompted to create or to keep up a faction or sect favorable to their views  and  interests.  These  serve  their  own  appetites  and  mind earthly things. But a great mass of sectaries are following, as they imagine, Jesus Christ and his Apostles, under the name and tenets of Luther, Calvin, Wesley, etc. They are, without knowing it, the mere followers of men: for they examine nothing for themselves by a constant and habitual reference to the Bible. 

Now, what may be the amount of carnality and fleshly or worldly influence that keeps them there, and what may be the amount of long-suffering  and  forgiveness  exercised  towards  them  from heaven, I presume not to dogmatize; but that the factionist — the person who makes a party, and he who labors to keep it up, are certainly earthly, sensual, and demoniacal; and, as such, not of the kingdom of God, we cannot but assert as a conviction deep and rational, derived from the most impartial examination of the sacred scriptures — from the clearest and most ample testimony of the Holy Spirit, speaking to us in the words of Prophets and Apostles. 

The Christian party are "built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and on Jesus the Messiah, himself the chief corner stone,"  and  therefore  *on  the  Christian  Scriptures  alone;*  not, indeed,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  Jewish,  but  as  the development and full revelation of all that concerns Christ and his kingdom contained in those scriptures. Now, all other parties that are in  any  way diverse from  the Christian party  are built  upon some  alloy — some  creed,  formula,  or  human  institution supplementary  to  the  apostolic  laws  and  customs.  This  alloy  is what makes the party. So many items of the Apostles' doctrine and so many notions of Calvin combined produce the compound called Calvinism. So many items of Luther's opinions, compounded with the Apostles' teaching, make Lutheranism. And so many portions of Wesley's speculations, compounded with certain portions of the New  Testament,  make  the  compound  called  Methodism.  The Christian ingredients in these compounds, so far as they are not neutralized by the human alloy, make the Christians among them; while the alloy makes the sectary. Take away all that belongs to the founder of the sect in all these parties, and they would certainly coalesce and form one community. 

Now, we do not suppose that there is the same guilt in forming a new  Protestant  party  that  there  was  in  first  of  all  forming  the Roman  Catholic,  the  Greek,  or  any  of  the  ancient  sects.  The modern sects have been got up with the desire of getting back to primitive Christianity; the ancient sects arose directly from the lust of  power — from  fleshly,  selfish,  and  worldly  motives.  Now, however,  since  we  have  so  largely  eaten  of  the  gall  and wormwood,  of  the  bitter  fruits  of  sects  and  parties;  and  have learned the cause, the cure, and the preventive of sectarianism, alas for all that are found keeping up the old landmarks of strife, or laying the foundation for new rivalries, partialities, and antipathies, to  arise  and  pollute  many,  to  retard  the  progress  of  the  gospel abroad, and to foster the spirit of infidelity at home. 

There remains another occurrence of *hairesis* (sect) in the writings of  Peter,  not  yet  formally  examined.  We  shall  now  specially consider  it.  This  Apostle  says,  "There  shall  be  false  teachers among you, who will privately introduce *destructive sects,* denying even  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  bringing  on  themselves  swift destruction; and many will follow their bad practices." Paul, in his valedictory  to  the  Ephesians,  also  speaks  of  "grievous  wolves devouring the flock, and of men rising out of their own society to draw away disciples after them, speaking perverse things." From these intimation we learn that the Apostles Paul and Peter foresaw the rise of sectaries and sects; and both of them, it is worthy of remark, distinctly connected the sects with sectarian teachers: for all sects have been originated by false teachers or by corrupt men. Sectaries, it would appear, occupy the same place under Christ that false Prophets filled under Moses. Need we, then, infer the danger of keeping up religious sects, or go on to prove that every one who builds up a party is a partaker of the crime with him who set it up? 

It behooves all men, then, who wish to be approved by the Lord at his coming, to be up and doing to purge and cleanse the Christian profession  from  every  root  and  branch  of  sectarianism,  and  to endeavor to destroy those destructive sects that have been a sort of Pandora's box to the human race; that have filled the profession with hypocrites, the world with infidels, and retarded for so many centuries the conversion of both Jews and Gentiles to the Christian faith. 

Finally,  while  endeavoring  to  abolish  the  old  sects,  let  us  be cautious that we form not a new one. This may be done by either adding to, or subtracting from, the apostolic constitution a single item.  Our  platform  must  be  as  long  and  as  broad  as  the  New Testament.  Every  person  that  the  Apostles  would  receive,  if present, we must receive; and therefore the one faith, one Lord, one baptism, one hope, one body, one Spirit, one God and Father of all, must be made the reason of one, and only one table. 

Factionists,  or  opinionists,  or  those  who  seek  to  attach  men  to themselves,  because  of  their  opinions  or  talents,  or  personal accidents, whatever they may be, are to be regarded as the very roots of bitterness in the Christian church — as seeking their own interests, honors, and profits, and not the things of Jesus Christ. By such spirits as these the ancient schisms and sects began; and by kindred spirits, of which every generation can furnish its proper ratios, they are kept alive. All such persons have not the power of effecting much; but now and then arises and succeeds in drawing away disciples after him. We can suggest no better remedies or preventives than those commanded by the Apostles. Let us hold fast their traditions; contend only for the faith; allow differences of opinion; suffer no dogmatists; countenance none of the disciples of Diotrephes; and walk by love, guided by that wisdom which is "first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be persuaded, full of mercy  and  of  good  fruits,  without  partiality  and  without hypocrisy." 

From the preceding inductions, it will appear, we presume, very evident to all, that we need neither telescopes nor microscopes to detect *heresies* in the New Testament sense of that word. They are neither more nor less than sects — plain, palpable sects and parties. Every party in Christendom, without respect to any of its tenets, opinions, or practices, is a *heresy,* a schism — unless there be such a party as stands exactly upon the Apostles' ground. Then, in that case, it is a sect just in the sense of the old sect of the Nazarenes, afterwards called *Christians,* and all others are guilty before the Lord, and must be condemned for their opposition to Christ's own party; whose party we are, provided we hold fast all, and only all apostolic traditions, and build upon the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible. 
