# Proposition 1

***The Apostles taught their disciples, or converts, that their sins were forgiven, and uniformly addressed them as pardoned or justified persons.*** 

John testifies that the youngest disciples were pardoned. "I write to you, little children, because your sins *are forgiven you* on account of his name." The young men strong in the Lord and the old men steadfast in the Lord, he commends for their attainments; but the *little children,* the youngest converts, he addressed as possessing this blessing as one common to all disciples, "Your sins are forgiven you, *on account of his name.*" 

Paul, in his letter to the Hebrews, asserts that one of the provisions of the New Institution is *the remission of the sins of all under it.* "*Their sins* and iniquities I will remember no more." From this he argues, as a first principle, in the Christian economy, "Now where remission of these is, no more offering for sin is needed." The reason assigned by the Apostles why *Christians* have no *sin offering* is because they have obtained remission of sins as a standing provision in the New Institution. 

The same Apostle testifies that the Ephesian disciples had obtained remission. "Be to one another kind, tenderhearted, forgiving each other, even as God for Christ's sake *has forgiven you.*" Here, also, in the enumeration of Christian privileges and immunities under Christ, he asserts forgiveness of sins as the common lot of all disciples. "In whom we have redemption through his blood, even *the forgiveness of sins,* according to the riches of his favor." In his letter to the Colossians, he uses the same words — "By whom we have *the forgiveness of sins.*" 

Figurative expressions are used by the same Apostle, expressive of the same forgiveness common to all Christians. "And such (guilty characters) were some of you; but *you are washed;* but *you are sanctified;* but *you are justified* by the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God." Peter, also, is a witness here. "Seeing *you have purified your souls* by obeying the truth through the Spirit." 

But there is no need of foreign, or remote, or figurative expressions, when so literally and repeatedly the Apostles assert it as one of the adjuncts of being a disciple of Jesus. Had we no other testimony than that found in a single letter to the Colossians, it would be sufficient to sustain this position. The command as given in chapter 3: 13, assumes it as a principle. "*As Christ forgave you, so also do you.*" But in the second chapter he makes this an inseparable adjunct of being in Christ. "You are *complete* in him — circumcised — buried with him — raised with him — made alive with him — **having forgiven you all trespasses**." 

These explicit testimonies from the most illustrious witnesses sustain my first proposition. On these evidences I rely, and I shall henceforth speak of it as a truth not to be questioned, viz.; that all the disciples of Christ converted in the apostolic age were taught by the Apostles to consider themselves as pardoned persons.
