# Proposition 8

***The gospel has in it a command, and as such must be obeyed.***

And here I need only ask, Who are they who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord? Paul replies, 'They who know not God, and *obey not the gospel of his Son.*'<sup>29</sup> To 'obey the gospel,' and to 'become obedient to the faith,' were common phrases in the apostolic discourses and writings. 'By whom we have received apostleship, in order to the *obedience of faith*  in  all  nations,  on  account  of  his  name.'<sup>30</sup>  'By  the commandment of the everlasting God, the gospel is made known to all nations for the *obedience of faith.*'<sup>31</sup> 'A great company of the priests  became  obedient  to  the  faith'<sup>32</sup>  'But  they  have  not  all obeyed the gospel;'<sup>33</sup> and, 'What shall be the end of them who *obey not the gospel*'?<sup>34</sup> From these sayings it is unquestionably plain, that either the gospel itself, taken as a whole, is a command, or that in it there is a command through the obedience of which salvation is enjoyed.

The  obedience  of  the  gospel  is  called  the  obedience  of  faith compared  with  the  obedience  of  law.  Faith  in  God's  promise through  Jesus  Christ  being  the  principle  from  which  obedience flows. To present the gospel in the form of a command is an act of favor, because it engages the will and the affections of men, and puts it in their power to have an assurance of their salvation from which  they  would  be  necessarily  excluded  if  no  such  act  of obedience were enjoyed.

Whatever the act of faith may be, it necessarily becomes the line of discrimination  between the two states  before described. On this side, and on that, mankind are in quite different states. On the one side they  are pardoned, justified, sanctified, reconciled, adopted and saved: on the other, they are in a state of condemnation. This act is sometimes called immersion, regeneration, conversion; and, that this act may appear obvious to all, we shall be at some pains to confirm and illustrate it.


That a relation or a state can be changed by an act, I need scarcely at this time attempt to prove; especially to those who know that the act of marriage, of naturalization, adoption, and their being born, changes  the  state  of  the  subject  of  such  acts.  But,  rather  than attempt to prove that a state is or may be changed by an act, I should rather ask if any person has heard, knows, or can conceive of  a  state  being  changed  without  some  act?  This  point,  being conceded to us by all the rational, we presume not to prove. But a question may arise whether *faith* itself, or an act of obedience to some  command  or  institution,  is  that  act  by  which  our  state  is changed.
