Conclusion ****

A word to the regenerated. — You have experienced the truth of the promise; and being introduced by that promise, you have become like Isaac, children of promise. You heard the testimony of God concerning Jesus of Nazareth, and you believed it. You were, in consequence of your faith, so disposed towards the person of Jesus, as to be willing to put yourselves under his guidance. This faith, and this will, brought you to the water. You were not ashamed, nor afraid  to  confess  him  before  men.  You  solemnly  declared  you regarded  him  as  God's  only  Son,  and  the  Savior  of  men.  You vowed allegiance to him. Down into the water you were led. Then the name of the Holy One upon your faith, and upon your person, was pronounced. You were then buried in the water under that name. It closed itself upon you. In its womb you were concealed. Into the Lord, as in the water, you were immersed. But in the water you continued not. Of it you were born, and from it you came forth,  raised  with  Jesus,  and  rising  in  his  strength.  There  your consciences were released; for there your old sins were washed away. And although you received not the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which confirmed the testimony of the first disciples, you felt the powers  of  the  world  to  come,  were  enlightened,  and  tasted  the bounty of God: for seasons of refreshment from the presence of God  came  upon  you.  Your  hearts  were  sprinkled  from  evil consciences,  when  your  bodies  were  washed  in  the  cleansing water. Then into the kingdom of Jesus you entered. The King of righteousness, of peace, and joy, extended his sceptre over you, and sanctified in state, and in your whole person, you rejoiced in the Lord with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Being washed, you  were  sanctified,  as  well  as  acquitted.  And  now  you  find yourselves under the great Advocate, so that sin cannot lord it over you; for you always look to the great Advocate to intercede for you; and thus, if sin should overtake you, you confess and forsake it, and always find mercy. Adopted thus into the family of God, you have not only received the name, the rank, and the dignity; but also the spirit of a son of God, and find, as such, that you are kings, priests, and heirs of God. You now feel that all things are yours, because  you  are  Christ's;  and  Christ  is  God's.  The  hope  of  the coming  regeneration  of  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  at  the resurrection  of  the  just,  animates  you.  You  look  for  the redemption, the adoption of your bodies, and their transfiguration. For  this  reason,  you  purify  yourselves  even  as  he  is  pure.  Be zealous, then, children of God; publish the excellencies of him, who has called you into this marvellous light and bliss. Be diligent, that you may receive the crown that never fades, and that you may eat of the tree of life, which grows in the midst of the Paradise of God.  If  you suffer  with  Jesus,  you  will reign  with  him.  If  you should  deny  him,  he  will  deny  you.  Add,  then,  to  your  faith, courage, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, and universal  benevolence;  for  if  you  continue  in  these  things  and abound, you shall not be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But should you be deficient in these things, your light will be obscured, and a forgetfulness that you have been purified from your old sins, will come upon you. Do, then, brethren, labor to make your calling and election sure; for thus practising, you shall never fall; but shall have an easy and abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. 

A word to the unregenerate. — Amongst you are sundry classes of character. Some of you who believe the gospel, and are changed in heart, quickened by the Spirit, are not generally ranked among the unregenerate. In the popular sense of this term you are regenerate. But we use it in its scriptural acceptation. Like Nicodemus, and like Joseph of Arimathea, you believe in Jesus, and are willing to take lessons from him in the chambers. You have confidence in his mission, respect and venerate, and even love his person; and would desire to be under his government. Marvel not that I say to you, *You must be born again.* Pious as you are supposed to be, and as you may think yourselves to be, unless you are born again, you cannot enter the Kingdom of God. Cornelius and his family were as devout and pious as any of you. "He feared God, gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God continually." Yet, mark it well, I beseech you, it was necessary "*to tell him words* by which himself and his  house *might  be saved.*" These words were told him: he believed them, and received the Holy Spirit, yet still he must be born again. For a person cannot be said to be born again *of anything which he receives;* and still less of miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit. He was immersed, and into the Kingdom of God he came. He was then saved. You need not ask, how or why these things are so. Do as Cornelius did, and then you will think of it in another light — then you would not for the world be unregenerate. To have the pledge, the promise, and seal of God, of the remission of all your sins, to be adopted into his family, and to receive the spirit of a son of God, be assured, my pious friends, are matters of no  every  day  occurrence;  and  when  you  feel  yourselves constitutionally  invested  with  all  these  blessings,  in  God's  own way,  you will say, that "his ways are not as our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways higher than our ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts." It is hard to make a slave feel and act as a freeman. As difficult, we often find it, to make the unregenerate feel and know the value and importance of regeneration. But the regenerate would not be unregenerate for the universe. 

God  has  one  way  of  bestowing  every  thing.  We  cannot  gather grapes off thorns, nor figs off thistles. The reason is, there they do not grow. We can tell no other reason why they cannot grow there, but that they do not grow there. We cannot have any blessing, but in God's own way of giving it. We cannot find wool save on the back of the sheep, nor silk save from the worm which spins it from itself. Corn and wheat cannot be obtained save from the plants which yield them. Without the plant, we cannot have the fruit. This is the economy of the whole material system. And in the world of spirits, and spiritual influences, is it not the same? Moral law is as unchangeable as the laws of nature. Moral means and ends are as inseparable as natural means and ends. God cannot bestow grace upon the proud, and cannot withhold it from the humble. He does not do it, and that is enough. He could shower down wheat and corn, and give us rivers of milk and wine, were it a question of mere  power.  But  taking  all  together,  his  wisdom,  power  and goodness, he cannot do it. So neither can he give us faith without testimony, hope without a promise, love without an amiable object, peace without purity, nor heaven without holiness. He cannot give to the unborn infant the light of the sun, the vivacity which the air imparts, nor the agility and activity which liberty bestows. He does not do it, and, therefore, we say, he cannot do it. Neither can he bestow the blessings of the Reign of Heaven upon those, who are the children of disobedience. 

I know how reluctant men are to submit to God's government; and yet they must all bow to it at last. "To Jesus every knee shall bow, and to him every tongue confess." But they will object to bowing *now,* and torture invention for excuses. They will tell me, all that I said is true of natural and moral means and ends; but immersion is not  a  moral  means,  because  God  forgave  sins  and  saved  men before immersion was appointed. "It is a *positive,* and not a *moral* institution."  And  is  there  no  moral  influence  connected  with positive institutions? A  *written*  law is  a positive institution:  for moral law existed before written law. But because it has become a positive  institution,  has  its  moral  power  ceased?  *The  moral influence  of  all  positive  institutions  is  God's*  **will**  expressed  in them. And it matters not, whether it be the *eating* or *not eating* of an apple, the building of an altar, or the building it with, or without the aid of iron tools; the offering of a kid, a lamb, a bullock, or a pigeon:  it  is  just  as  morally  binding,  and  has  the  same  moral influence, as "You shall honor your father and mother;" or "You shall not kill." It is **the will of god** in any institution, which gives it all its moral and physical power. No man could now be pardoned as Abel was — as Enoch was — as David was — as the thief upon the cross  was.  These  all  lived  before  the  *second*  will  of  God  was declared. He took away "*the first will,*" says Paul, "that he might establish the *second will,*" by which we are sanctified. We are not pardoned as were the Jews or the patriarchs. It was not till Jesus was buried and rose again, that an acceptable offering for sin was presented in the heavens. By one offering up of himself, he has perfected the conscience of the immersed or sanctified. Since his oblation, a new institution for remission has been appointed. You need  not  flatter  yourselves,  that  God  will  save  or  pardon  you except for Christ's sake; and if his name is not assumed by you, if you have not put him on, if you have not come under his advocacy, you have not the name of Christ to plead, nor his intercession on your  behalf — and  therefore,  for  Christ's  sake  you  cannot  be forgiven.  Could  Abel,  Enoch,  Noah,  Abraham,  Moses,  Aaron, think you, if living now — could they, I ask, find forgiveness as the altar? And will you imagine, that he, who honored every institution by  Moses,  by  connecting  rewards  and  punishments  with  the obedience or disobedience of his commands, be less jealous for the honor of the institution of his Son? And will that Son who for no other purpose than to honor his Father's institution, was immersed in the Jordan, bestow pardon or salvation upon any, who refuse to honor him, and him that sent him? He has been graciously pleased to  adapt  means  to  ends. He has  commanded immersion for the remission  of  sins;  and,  think  you,  that  he  will  change  his institutions, because of your stubborn or intractable dispositions? As well, as reasonably might you pray for loaves from heaven, or manna, because Israel ate it in the desert; as to pray for pardon, while you refuse the remission of sins by immersion. 

Demur not because of the simplicity of the thing. Remember how simple was the eating of the fruit of that tree, "whose mortal taste brought death into the world, and all our woe." How simple was the rod in the hand of Moses, when stretched over Egypt and the Red Sea? How simple was looking at the brazen serpent? And how simple  are  God's  institutions?  How  simple  the  aliments  of nature; — the poisons  too,  and their remedies? Where the  will of God is, there is omnipotence. It was simple to speak the universe into existence. But God's will gives efficacy to every thing. And obedience ever was, and ever will be the happiness of man. It is the happiness of heaven. It is God's philanthropy which has given us something  to  obey.  To  the  angels  who  sinned  he  has  given  no command.  It  was  gracious  to  give  us  a  command  to  live — a command to reform — a command to be born again — to live forever. Remember light and life first came by obedience. If God's voice had not been obeyed, the water would not have brought forth the earth,  nor  would  the  sun  have  blessed  it  with  his  rays.  The obedience of law was goodness and mercy; but the obedience of faith is favor, and life, and glory everlasting. None to whom this gospel is announced will perish, except those who know not God, and obey not the gospel of his Son. Kiss, then, the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish for ever. 

To the unregenerate of all classes, whose education and prejudices compel them to assent to the testimony of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter, James, and Jude. — You own the mission of Jesus from the bosom of the Eternal — and that is *all* you do! Each of you is living without God, and without hope in the world — aliens from the family of God — of various ranks and grades among men; but all involved in one condemnation, because light  has come into the world, and you love darkness, and the works of darkness, rather than  light.  To  live  without  hope  is  bad  enough;  but  to  live  in constant dread of the vengeance of Heaven, is still worse. But do you not tremble at the word of God? 

If you can be saved here, or hereafter, then there is no meaning in language,  no  pain  in  the  universe,  no  truth  in  God — death,  the grave, and destruction have no meaning. The frowns of Heaven are all smiles, if you perish not in your ways. 

But you purpose to bow to Jesus, and to throw yourselves upon his mercy at last. Impious thought! When you have given the strength of your intellect, the vigor of your constitution, the warmth of your affections, the best energies of your life, to the world, the flesh and the devil; you will stretch out your palsied hands and turn your dim eyes to the Lord and say, "Lord, have mercy upon me!" The first fruits, and fatlings of the devil, the lame and the blind for God, is the purpose of your heart; and the best resolution you can form! 

The thief upon the cross, had he done so, could not have found mercy. It is one thing to have known the way of salvation, assented to it, and to have in deliberate resolution rejected it for the present, with a promise of obeying it at some future period; and to have never known it, or assented to it, to the end of life. Promise not, then, to yourselves, what has never happened to others. The devil has always said, "You may give *to morrow* to the Lord — only give to me *to-day.*" This has been all that he has asked, and this is what you are disposed to give. Promise not *to-morrow* to the Lord, for you will be still less disposed to give it when it comes; and the Lord has not asked you for *to-morrow.* He says, **to-day**, when you shall hear his voice, harden not your hearts. But you say, you are willing to come to the Lord *to day* if you knew the way, or if you were  *prepared!*  Well,  what  does  the  Lord  require  of  you  as *preparation?* He once said, "Let the wicked man forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God for he will abundantly pardon." He says also, "Draw nigh to me, and I will draw nigh to you;" "Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you men of two souls;" "Wash you, make you clean; put away the evil of your doings;" "Reform and be converted;" "Turn to the Lord;" "Be immersed for the remission of your sins;" and "Submit to the government of Jesus." "What! just as I am!" Pray, how are you? Have you such a persuasion in your heart of the mission of Jesus, as God's own Son, and the only Savior; and have you so much confidence in his personal character, as to be willing to surrender yourself to him for the present and future — for time and eternity? "I have," you say. As one that has heard his voice,  I  say,  then,  Come  and  be  regenerated,  and  seasons  of refreshment from the Lord will come to you. 

"But I thought I ought to feel like a Christian first, and to have the experience of a Christian before I came to the Lord." Indeed! Did the  Lord  tell  you  so?  "His  ministers  taught  me  so."  It  is  hard knowing  who  are  his  ministers  now-a-days.  His  *commissioned* ministers taught you not so. They were not taught to say so. The Master  knew  that  to  wait  for  health  before  we  went  to  the physician — to seek for warmth before we approached the fire — to wait  till  we  ceased  to  be  hungry  before  we  approached  the table — was  not  reasonable.  And  therefore  he  never  asked,  as  he never  expected,  any  one  to  feel  like  a  Christian  before  he  was immersed and began to live like a Christian. None but the citizens of any country can experience the good or evil of the government which presides over it. None but the married can experience the conjugal relation and feelings. None but sons and daughters can have the experience of sons and daughters; and none but those who obey the gospel can experience the sweets of obedience. I need not add, that none but the disobedient can experience the pains, the fears, and terrors of the Lord — the shame and remorse which are the first fruits of the anguish and misery, which await them in another world. As the disobedient, who stumble at the word, have the first fruits of the awful destruction from the presence of the Lord which awaits  them;  so  the  disobedient  have  the  first  fruits  of  the Spirit — the salvation of their souls, as an earnest of the salvation to be revealed at the coming of the Lord. 

And now let me ask all the unregenerate, What do you propose to yourselves by either delaying or refusing to come to the Lord? Will delaying  have  any  tendency  to  fit  you  or  prepare  you  for  his salvation?  Will  your  lusts  have  less  power,  or  sin  have  less dominion  over  you,  by  continuing  under  their  control?  Has  the intoxicating cup, by indulgence, diminished a taste for it? Has the avarice of the miser been weakened, or cured, by yielding to it? Has any propensity been destroyed by gratifying it, in any other way  than  as  it  destroyed  the  animal  system?  Can  you,  then, promise yourselves that, by continuing in disobedience, you will love obedience, and be more inclined to submit when you have longer resisted the Spirit of God! Presume not on the mercy of God, but in the way that mercy flows. Grace has its channels, as the waters have their courses; and its path, as the lightning of the clouds. Each has its law, as fixed as the throne of God; and think not God will work a miracle for your salvation. 

Think you that the family of Noah could have been saved, if they had refused to enter into the Ark? Could the first born of Israel have escaped the destroying angel, but in houses sprinkled with blood? or could Israel have escaped the wrath of Pharaoh, but by being immersed into Moses in the cloud and in the sea? These things  are  written  for  our  admonition,  upon  whom  the consummation  of  past  ages  has  come.  Arise,  then,  and  be immersed and wash away your sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. The *many* *who refuse grace* will neither prove you wise nor safe in disobedience. 

- Multitudes are no mark  

`  `That you will right be found;    A few were saved in the Ark,    For many millions drown'd.    Obey the gospel call,  

`  `And enter while you may;  

`  `Christ's flock have long been small,    Yet none are safe but they."  

***Effects of Modern Christianity63*** 

Our greatest objection to the systems which we oppose, is their impotency  on  the  heart.  Alas!  what  multitudes  of  prayerless, saintless, Christless, joyless hearts, have crowded Christianity out of the congregations  by their experiences before baptism! They seem to have had all their religion before they professed it. They can  relate  no  experience  since  baptism,  comparable  to  that professed before the "mutual pledge" was tendered and received. 

It was the indubitable proofs of the superabundance of this fruit, which caused me first to suspect the far-famed tree of evangelical orthodoxy.  That  cold-heartedness — that  stiff  and  mercenary formality — that tithing of mint, anise, and dill — that negligence of mercy, justice, truth, and the love of God, which stalked through the communions of sectarian altars — that apathy and indifference about  "*thus  saith  the  Lord*" — that  zeal  for  human prescriptions — and, above all, that willing ignorance of the sayings and doings of Jesus Christ and his apostles, which so generally appeared, first of all created, fostered, and matured my distrust in the reformed systems of evangelical sectaries. Communion, with me, was communion of kindred souls, immersed into one God, that celestial magnet which turns our aspirations and adorations to him who washed us from our sins in his own blood, and made us kings and priests to God. 

To sit in the same pew; to gather round the same pulpit; to put our names to the same covenant, or subscription list: to contribute for a weekly sermon; to lisp the same opinions, extracted from the same creed,  always  appeared  to  me  unworthy  bonds  of  union  or communion, and therefore my soul abhorred them as substitutes for the love of God shed abroad in the heart, for the communion of the Holy Spirit. "If a man would give all the substance of his house as a substitute for love, it should be utterly contemned." 

The  Divine  Philosopher  preached  reformation  by  addressing himself  to  the  *heart.*  We  begin  with  the  heart.  "Make  the  tree good," and then good fruit may be expected. But this appears to be the error of all sects in a greater or less degree; they set about *mending* the heart, as preliminary to that which alone can *create a new  heart.*  Jesus  gives  us  the  philosophy  of  his  scheme  in  an address to a sinner of that time — "Your sins," says he, "are forgiven you: go, and sin no more." He first changes the sinner's state, not external but internal, and then says, "*Go, and sin no more.*" He frankly forgave the debt. The sinner loved him. 

There  was  much  of  this  philosophy  in  question,  "*Who  loves most* — he  that  was  forgiven  five  hundred  pence,  or  he  that  was forgiven fifty? How much does he love who is not forgiven at all?" Aye, that question brings us onward a little to the reason why the first act of obedience to Jesus Christ should be baptism into his name, and that for the remission of sins. 

But now we speak of the exercises of the heart. While any man believes the words of Jesus, "Out of the heart proceed the actions which defile the man," he can never lose sight of the heart, as the object on which all evangelical arguments are to terminate, and as the *fons et principium,* the fountain and origin, of all piety and humanity. 

Once for all, let it be distinctly noted, that we appreciate nothing in religion which tends not directly and immediately, proximately and remotely, to the purification and perfection of the heart. Paul acts the philosopher fully once, and, if we recollect right, but once, in all his writings upon this subject. It has been for many years a favorite topic with me. It is in his first epistle to Timothy — "Now the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart — out of a good conscience — out of faith unfeigned." Faith unfeigned brings a person to remission, or to a good conscience; a good conscience precedes, in the order of nature, a pure heart; and that is the only soil in which love, that plant of celestial origin, can grow. This is our philosophy of Christianity — of the gospel. And thus it is the wisdom and power of God to salvation. We proceed upon these as our  axiomata  in  all  our  reasonings,  preachings,  writings — 1st. unfeigned faith; 2d. a good conscience; 3d. a pure heart; 4th. love. The  testimony  of  God,  apprehended,  produces  unfeigned  or genuine  faith;  faith  obeyed,  produces  a  good  conscience.  This Peter  defines  to  be  the  use  of  baptism,  the  answer  of  a  good conscience.  This  produces  a  pure  heart,  and  then  the consummation is love — love to God and man. 

Paul's  order  or  arrangement  is  adopted  by  us  as  infallible. Testimony — faith  unfeigned — remission,  or  a  good  conscience — a pure  heart — love.  Preaching,  praying,  singing,  commemorating, meditating, all issue here. "Happy the pure in heart, for they shall see God." 

***Immersion Not a Mere Bodily Act*** 

Views of baptism, as a mere external and bodily act, exact a very injurious  influence  on  the  understanding  and  practice  of  men. Hence,  many  ascribe  to  it  so  little  importance  in  the  Christian economy. "Bodily exercise," says Paul, "profits little." We have been taught to regard immersion in water, into the name of the Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy  Spirit,  as  an  act  of  the  whole man; — body, soul, and Spirit. The soul of the intelligent subject is as fully immersed *into the Lord Jesus,* as his body is immersed *in the water.* His soul rises with the Lord Jesus, as his body rises out of the water; and into one spirit with all the family of God is he immersed.  It  is  not  like  circumcising  a  Hebrew  infant  or proselyting to Moses a Gentile adult. — The candidate believing in the person, mission, and character of the Son of God, and willing to submit to him, immediately, upon recognizing him, hastens to be buried with the Lord, and to rise with him, not corporeally but spiritually, with his whole soul. 

Reader, be admonished how you speak of bodily acts in obedience to divine institutions. Remember Eve, Adam, and all transgressors on the one hand. Remember Abel, Noah, Enoch, Moses, Abraham, down to the harlot Rahab, on the other; and be cautious how you speak of bodily acts! Rather remember the sacrifice of a body on mount Calvary, and talk not lightly of bodily acts. There is no such things as outward bodily acts in the Christian institution; and less than in all others, in the act of immersion. Then it is that the spirit, soul, and body of man become one with the Lord. Then it is that the power of Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, come upon us. Then it is that we are enrolled among the children of God, and enter the ark, which will, if we abide in it, transport us to the Mount of God. 

***Justification Ascribed to Seven Causes*** 

In examining the New Testament, we find that a man is said to be "***justified  by  faith**,*"  Rom.  5:1;  Gal.  2:16;  Gal.  3:24.  "***Justified freely  by  his  grace**,*"  Rom.  3:24;  Titus  3:7.  "***Justified  by  his blood**,*"  Rom.  5:9.  "***Justified  by  works**,*"  James  2:21;  James 2:24-25. "***Justified in or by the name of the Lord Jesus,***" 1 Cor. 6:11. "***Justified by Christ**,*" Gal. 2:16. "***Justified by knowledge**,*" Is. 53:11. "It is God that justifies," Rom. 8:33, viz: by these *seven* means — by Christ, his name, his blood, by knowledge, grace, faith, and  by  works.  Are  these  all  literal?  Is  there  no  room  for interpretation here? He that selects *faith* out of *seven* must either act arbitrarily or show his reason; but the reason does not appear in the text. He must reason it out; he must infer it. Why, then, assume that faith *alone* is the reason of our justification? Why not assume that the *name* of the Lord alone is the great matter, seeing his name "is the only name given under heaven by which any man can be saved;" and men "who believe receive *the remission of sins by his name:*"64 and especially, because the name of Jesus, or of the Lord, is more frequently mentioned in the New Testament, in reference to all spiritual blessings, than anything else!! Call all these *causes,* or *means* of justification, and what then? We have the grace of God as the *moving* cause, Jesus Christ for the *efficient* cause, his blood  the  *procuring*  cause,  knowledge  the  *disposing*  cause,  the name of the Lord the *immediate* cause, faith the *formal* cause, and works for the *concurring* cause. For example: a gentleman on the sea shore descries the wreck of a vessel at some distance from land, driving out into the ocean, and covered with a miserable and perishing  sea-drenched  crew.  Moved  by  pure  philanthropy,  he sends his son in a boat to save them. When the boat arrives at the wreck, he invites them in, unto this condition, that they submit to his guidance. A number of the crew stretch out their arms, and seizing the boat with their hands, spring into it, take hold of the oars, and row to  land, while some, from  cowardice, and others because  of  some  difficulty  in  coming  at  the  boat,  wait  the expectation of a second trip; but before it is returned, the wreck went to pieces, and they all perished. The *moving* cause of their salvation who escaped was the good will of the gentleman on the shore; the son who took the boat, was the *efficient* cause; the boat itself,  the  *procuring*  cause;  the  knowledge  of  their  perishing condition and his invitation, the *disposing* cause; the seizing the boat with their hands, and springing into it, the *immediate* cause; their  consenting  to  his  condition,  the  *formal*  cause;  and  their rowing to shore, under the guidance of his son, was the *concurring* cause of their salvation. — Thus men are justified or saved by grace, by Christ, by his blood, by faith, by knowledge, by the name of the Lord, and by works. But of the *seven* causes, *three* of which are purely  instrumental,  why  choose  *one*  of  the  instrumental,  and emphasize  upon  it  as  the  justifying  or  saving  cause,  to  the exclusion of, or in preference to, the others? Every one in its own place is essentially necessary. 

If we examine the word *saved* in the New Testament, we shall find that we are said to be saved by as many causes, though some of them differently denominated, as those by which we are said to be justified. Let us see: we are said to be "saved by grace," Eph. 2:5; "saved through his life," Rom. 5:9-10; "saved through faith," Eph. 2:8, Acts 16:31; "saved by baptism," 1 Peter 3:21; or "by faith and baptism,"  Mark  16:16;  or  "by  the  washing  of  regeneration  and renewal of the Holy Spirit," Titus 3:5; or "by the gospel," 1 Cor. 15:2; or "by calling upon the Lord," and by "enduring to the end," Acts  2:21,  Rom.  10:13,  Matt.  10:22.  Here  we  have  salvation ascribed  to  grace,  to  Jesus  Christ,  to  his  death  and resurrection — *three*  times  to  baptism,  either  by  itself  or  in conjunction,  once  with  faith,  and  once  with  the  Holy  Spirit;  to works, or to calling upon the Lord, or to enduring to the end. To these we might add other phrases nearly similar, but these include all the causes to which we have just now alluded. Saved by grace the *moving* cause; by Jesus the *efficient* cause; by his death, and resurrection,  and  life,  the  *procuring*  cause;  by  the  gospel,  the *disposing*  cause;  by  faith,  the  *formal*  cause;  by  baptism,  the *immediate* cause; and by enduring to the end, or persevering in the Lord, the *concurring* cause. 

***Peter in Jerusalem, Paul in Philippi, Reconciled*** 

Thousands  ask  Peter,  *What  shall  we  do?*  The  Jailor  asks  Paul, *What shall I do?* **to be saved**, if the reader pleases. Peter says, Reform,  and  be  baptized  every  one  of  you,  etc.  Paul  answers, "Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, with thy family." How is this, Paul and Peter? Why do you not preach the same gospel, and answer the same question in the same or similar terms? Paul, do you preach another gospel to the Gentiles, than Peter  preached  to  the  Jews?  What  sayest  thou,  Paul?  Paul replies — "Strike, but hear me. Had I been in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost,  I would have spoken as Peter did. Peter spoke to believing and penitent Jews; I spoke to an ignorant Roman jailor. I arrested his attention after the earthquake, by simply announcing that there was salvation to him and all his family, through belief in Jesus." — But  why  did  you  not  mention  repentance,  baptism,  the Holy Spirit? "Who told you I did not?" Luke adds nothing about it; and I concluded you said nothing about them. — Luke was a faithful historian, was he not? "Yes, very faithful: and why did you not faithfully hearken to his account? Does he not immediately subjoin that as soon as I got the jailor's ear, I *spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all that were in his house?*" Why you reason like a Paidobaptist.  You  think,  do  you,  that  the  jailor's  children  were saved by his faith! I spoke the whole gospel, or word of the Lord to the jailor and to his family. In speaking *the word of the Lord,* I mentioned  repentance,  baptism,  remission,  the  Holy  Spirit,  the resurrection, judgment, and eternal life: else why should I have baptized him and all his house; and why should he have rejoiced afterwards with all his family!" Paul, I beg your pardon. I will not interrogate Peter, for I know how he will answer me: he would say — "Had I been in Philippi, I would have spoken to an ignorant Pagan as Paul did, to show that salvation flowed through faith in Jesus; and when he believed this and repented, I would *then* have said, Be baptized for the remission of your sins." 

1 The reformer also said: " If the article of justification be once lost, then is all true Christian doctrine lost." Preface to the Ep. Gal, Phil, ed. 1800.  

2 1 Jn 2:12.  

3 Heb. 10:17.  

4 Heb. 10:18.  

5 Eph. 4:32.  

6 Eph. 1:7.  

7 Col. 1:14.  

8 1 Co 6:11.  

9 1 Pe 1:22.  

10 Rom. 5:1.  

11 Rom. 3:24.  

12 Rom. 5:9.  

13 1 Co 6:11.  

14 James 2:24.  

15 Rom. 8:33.  

16 1 Co 6:11.  

17 Rom. 5:10.  

18 2 Co 5:18.  

19 Col. 1:19-22.  

20 Gal. 4:6.  

21 Eph. 1:5.  

22 Acts 2:47.  

23 1 Co 1:18.  

24 1 Co 15:2.  

25 1 Pe 3:21.  

26 1 Pe 1:1; 1 Pe 1:8-9.  

27 To prevent mistakes, I shall here transcribe a part of a note found in the Appendix to the second edition of the *new version* of the Christian Scriptures, p. 452.  

- I  am  not  desirous  of  diminishing  the  difference  of  meaning  between 

immersing a person *in the name* of the Father, and *into the name* of the Father. They are quite different ideas. But it will be asked, Is this a correct translation? To which I answer most undoubtedly it is. For the preposition *eis* is that used in this place, and not *en.* By what *inadvertency* the king's translators gave it *in* instead of *into* in this passage, and elsewhere gave it *into* when speaking of the same ordinance, I presume not to say. But they have been followed by most modern translators, and with them they translate it *into* in other places where it occurs, in relation *to this* *institution:* For example: — 1 Co 12:13. For by one spirit we are all immersed *into* one body; Rom. 6:3. Don't you know that so many of you as were immersed *into* Christ, were immersed *into* his death? Gal. 3:27. As many of you as have been immersed *into* Christ, have put on Christ. Now, for the same reason they ought to have rendered the following passages the same way. Acts 8:16. Only they were immersed *into* the name of the Lord Jesus. 19: 3. *Into* what name were you then immersed? When they heard this, they were immersed *into* the name of the Lord Jesus. 1 Co 1:13. Were you immersed *into* the name of Paul? Lest any should say I had immersed *into* my own name. 1 Co 10:1. Our fathers were all immersed *into* Moses in the cloud and in the sea. Now in all these places it is *eis* and *en* is clearly marked in the last quotation. They were immersed *into* Moses — not *into* the cloud, and *into* the sea, but *in* the cloud and *in* the sea. To be immersed *into* Moses is one thing, and *in* the sea is another. To be immersed *into* the name of Father, and *in* the name of the Father, are just as distinct. " *In the name*" is equivalent to, "*by the authority of.*" In the name of the king, or commonwealth, is by the authority of the king or commonwealth. Now the question is, Did the Savior mean that the disciples were to be immersed by the authority of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? If by the authority of the Father, for what purpose were they immersed? The authority by which any action is done is one thing, and the object for which it is done is another. Now who that can discriminate, can think that it is one and the same thing to be immersed *in* the name of the Lord, and to  be  immersed  *into*  the  name  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  The  former  denotes  the authority by which the action is performed — the latter the object for which it is performed.  Persons  are  said  to  enter  *into*  matrimony,  to  enter  *into*  and alliance, to get *into* debt, to run *into* danger. Now to be immersed *into* the name of the Lord Jesus was a form of speech, in ancient usage, as familiar and significant as any of the preceding. And when we analyze these expression, we find  they  all  import  that  the  persons  are  either  under  the  obligations  or influence of those things into which they are said to enter, or into which they are  introduced.  Hence  those  immersed  into  one  body,  were  under  the influences and obligations of that body. Those immersed into Moses, assumed Moses as their lawgiver, guide, and protector, and risked every thing upon his authority,  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness.  Those  who  were  immersed  into Christ  put  him  on,  and  acknowledged  his  authority  and  laws,  and  were governed  by  his  will:  and  those  who  were  immersed  into  the  name  of  the Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit,  regarded  the  Father  as  the  fountain  of  all authority — the Son as the only Savior — and the Holy Spirit as the only advocate 

28 *State* here has respect to the whole person. It may be argued that state is as pertinently applied to the mind or heart as to the whole person; and that when the state of the mind is changed by a belief of God's testimony, the subject of that change is brought into as near a relation to God as he can be in this life; and as the kingdom of Jesus is a spiritual kingdom, he is as fit for admission into it, and for the enjoyment of its blessings, whenever his heart is changed from enmity to love, as he ever can be; nay, in truth, is actually initiated into the kingdom of Jesus the moment his mind is changed — and that to insist upon any personal act as necessary to admission, because  such acts are necessary to admission  into  all  the  social  and  political  relations  in  society,  is  an over-straining the analogies between things earthly and things heavenly. Not one  of  our  opponents,  as  far  as  we  remember,  has  thus  argued.  We  have sometimes thought that they might have thus argued with incomparably more speciosity than appears in any of their objections.  

`  `But without pausing to inquire whether the state of the heart can be perfectly changed  from  enmity  to  love,  without  an  assurance  of  remission  on  some ground,  or  in  consequence  of  some  *act  of  the  mind*  prerequisite thereunto; — without being at pains to show that the truth of this proposition is not at all essential to our argument, but only *illustrative* of it; we may say, that as Christ has redeemed the whole man, body, soul, and spirit, by his obedience even to death — so in coming into his kingdom on earth, and in order to the *enjoyment* of all the present salvation, the *state of the whole person* must be changed; and this is what we apprehend Jesus meant by his saying, " Unless a *man* is born of *water and spirit*, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God," and what we mean in distinguishing a change of heart, or of views and feelings, from a change of state.  

29 2 Th 1:8.  

30 Rom. 1:5.  

31 Rom. 16:26.  

32 Acts 6:7.  

33 Rom. 10:16.  

34 1 Pe 4:17.  

35 Rom. 5:2. Eph. 3:12.  

36  There  is  no  propriety  in  the  common  version  of  this  member  of  the sentence — *when,*  instead  of  *that,*  "seasons  of  refreshment."  Some  make modern *revivals* "seasons of refreshment," such as these here alluded to. Then it would read, ' That your sins may be blotted out in times of revivals' — when revivals shall come! The term is *opos,* which, in this construction, as various critics  have  contended,  is  equivalent  to  '*that*'  in  our  tongue.  To  promise  a future remission is no part of the gospel, nor of the apostolic proclamation. All Christians experience seasons of refreshment in cordially obeying the gospel.  

37 Acts 15:3.  

38 Acts 9:1-43 :  

39 Acts 26:17-18.  

40 The following examples of the above general rule illustrate its value and certainty: — " Let us offer up the sacrifice of praise to God, *confessing* to his name."  Heb.  13:15.  "  Let  us  go  forth  to  him  out  of  the  camp,  *bearing*  his reproach." Heb. 13:13. " Be an approved workman, *rightly* dividing the word of truth." 2 Tim. 2:15. " Guard the precious deposit, *avoiding* profane babblings." 1  Tim.  6:20.  "  Observe  these  things  without  prejudice,  *doing*  nothing  by partiality." 1 Tim. 5:21. " Pray every where *lifting* up holy hands." 1 Tim. 2:8. " Walking in wisdom to them that are without, *gaining* time." Col. iv: 5. " Do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, *giving* thanks to God." Col. 3:17. " Speak the truth, *putting* away lying." Eph. 4:25. " Be not vainglorious, *provoking* one another. Gal. 5:26. " Convert the nations, *baptizing* them," etc. etc. Now, do not all these participles define their respective imperatives, or show the way and manner in which this command should be obeyed! Many similar examples may be found in all the sacred writings.  

`  `This  rule  has  passed  through  a  fiery  trial.  I  have  only  been  more  fully convinced of its generality and value. There is no rule in the English syntax more general in its application. I would only add, that the participle does not always express every thing in the command; but it always points out something emphatically  in  the  intention  of  the  imperative,  and  without  which  the injunction cannot be suitably and fully performed.  

`  `We  have,  however,  no  need  of  this  rule,  nor  of  anything  not  generally conceded,  to  establish  the  point  before  us:  for  the  New  Testament  and  all antiquity teach, that so long as the Apostles lived, no one was regarded as a disciple of Christ who had not confessed his faith and was immersed.  

41 Titus 3:5.  

42 See the following essay on Regeneration.  

43 That John 3:5, and Titus 3:5, refer to immersion, is the judgment of all the learned Catholics and Protestants of every name under heaven.  

`  `The  authors  and  finishers  of  the  Westminster  creed — one  hundred  and twenty-one Divines, ten Lords, and twenty Commissioners of the Parliament of England, under the question 165, " *What is baptism?*" quote John 3:5, Titus 3:5, to prove that baptism is a washing with water, and a "*sign of remission of sins.*"    Michaelis, Horne, Lightfoot, Beveridge, Taylor, Jones of Nayland, Bp. Mant, Whitby, Burkit, Bp. Hall, Dr. Wells, Hooker, Dr. C. Ridley, Bp. Ryder: — but why attempt a list of great names? There are a thousand more who assert it.  

`  `Bp. White says, that "regeneration, as detached from baptism, never entered into any creed before the 17th century."  

`  `Whitby,  on  John  3:5,  says,  "  That  our  Lord  here  speaks  of  baptismal regeneration, *the whole Christian church* from its *earliest times* has *invariably taught.*"  

`  `Our modern "great divines," even in America, have taught the same. Timothy Dwight, the greatest Rabbi of Presbyterians the New World has produced, says, vol. 4: pp. 300, 301, "*to be born again,* is precisely the same thing as to be born of water and the Spirit." — " To be born of water is to be baptized." And how uncharitable! —  He adds, " He who understanding the nature and authority of this institution, refuses to be baptized, WILL NEVER ENTER INTO THE VISIBLE NOR INVISIBLE KINGDOM OF GOD." Vol. 4: p. 302. So preached the President of Yale.  

`  `George Whitefield, writing on John 3:5, says, " Does not this verse urge the *absolute necessity of water baptism? Yes,* when it may be had. But how God will deal with persons unbaptized, *we cannot tell.*" Vol. 4: p. 355. I say with him, *we cannot tell with certainty.* But I am of the opinion, that when a neglect proceeds  from  a  simple  mistake  of  sheer  ignorance,  and  when  there  is  no aversion, but a will to do everything the Lord commands, the Lord will admit into the everlasting kingdom those who by reason of this mistake never had the testimony  of  God  assuring  them  of  pardon  or  justification  here,  and consequently never did fully enjoy the salvation of God on earth. But I will say with the renowned President of Yale, that "he who, understanding the nature and authority of this institution, refuses to be baptized, will never enter the visible nor invisible kingdom of God." By the "visible and invisible kingdom," he means the kingdom of grace and glory. He adds on the same page, " He who persists in this act of rebellion against the authority of Christ, will never belong to his kingdom." Vol. 4: p. 302.  

`  `John Wesley asserts, that by baptism we enter into *covenant with God,* an everlasting covenant, are admitted into the church, made members of Christ, made the children of God. By *water* as the *means,* the waters of baptism, we are regenerated or born again."  

44 John 1:12.  

45 Acts 2:1-47 :  

46 Acts 15:17.  

47 See Christian Baptist, vol. 6, p. 268.  

48 Heb. 10:24.  

49 2 Pe 1:9.  

50 Book of Similitudes, chap. 16:  

51 Com. 4, chap. 3:  

52 4th London edition, p. 116, vol. 1, A. D. 1829.  

53 Vol. 1, p. 24.  

54 Vol. 1, p. 8.  

55 Page 194.  

56 Common Prayer, p. 165.  

57 Page 165.  

58 Inst. 50: 4, 115: p. 327.  

59 Vitringa, tom. 1. 50. 2: 100: 6. 9.  

60 Owen on Justification, 100: 2: p. 183.  

61 Col. 2:11; Col. 2:13-14.  

62 Titus 3:5.  

63 A second Essay, called the " *Extra Defended,*" on this same subject, in reply to  a  pamphlet  from  Elder  Andrew  Broaddus,  of  Virginia,  titled  the  "  Extra Examined," appeared in October, 1831. From our Defence, we here insert only four extracts. The subject as defended, being fully expressed in the preceding essay.  

64 Acts 10:43.  

