Recapitulation ****

As Christian faith rests upon, and Christian practice proceeds from, *the testimony of God,* and not from the reasonings of men; — I will, in  this  recapitulation,  only  call  up  the  evidences  on  one  single proposition, assumed, sustained, and illustrated in the preceding pages;  that  that  is  the  *ninth  proposition,*  as  sustained  by  the apostolic  testimony.  We  wish  to  leave  before  the  mind  of  the diligent  reader  the  great  importance  attached  to  Christian immersion,  as  presented  in  the  Evangelists,  the  Acts,  and  the Epistles. 

1. __*In the Evangelists* — it is called *the forgiveness of sins*__*.* Matthew and Mark introduce the Messiah in his own person in giving the commission. Luke does not. Matthew presents Jesus, saying, "Go, convert the nations, immersing them into the name of the Father, the Son, and Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things which I have commanded you." This, of course, in order to salvation. Mark presents him saying, "Go into all the world, proclaim the glad tidings to the whole creation; and he who believes, and is immersed,  shall  be  saved;  but  he  who  believes  not,  shall  be condemned." Luke, however, does not introduce the Lord in his own  person  in  giving  the  charge;  but  records  it,  in  his  own conception of it, in the following words: — That "reformation and forgiveness of sins should be announced in his name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." No person, we presume, will question but that  Luke  thus  records  the  commission; — and,  if  so,  then  it  is indisputable, that as Luke neither mentions faith nor immersion, he substitutes for them the received import of both, when and where he  wrote.  Metonymically  he  places  repentance,  or  rather *reformation,*  for  faith;  and  *remission  of  sins,*  for  immersion.  In Luke's  acceptation  and  time  forgiveness  of  sins  stood  for immersion, and reformation for faith — the effect for the means or cause. The only reference to the commission found in John, occurs 20: 21. "As the Father has sent me, so send I you: — whose sins soever you remit, are remitted to them; and whose sins soever you retain are retained." Here is neither faith, repentance, nor baptism; but  the  object,  *remission  of  sins,*  is  literally  proposed.  In  the commission, salvation is attached by the Lord Jesus to faith and immersion into his name. He that believes and is immersed, shall be saved. Thus immersion is taught in the testimonies of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. 
2. ***In the Acts of the Apostles*** — Sermon 1, Peter says, "Reform and be immersed, every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of your sins, and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit." Sermon 2, he says, "Reform and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out; that seasons of refreshment from the presence of the Lord may come, and that he may send Jesus," etc. In the same discourse, he says,  "God having raised up his Son Jesus, has sent him to bless you, every one of you, turning from his iniquities." In his 3d Sermon, recorded Acts 10:1-48 : he says, "To him all the Prophets bear witness, that every one who believes in him shall receive remission of sins *by his name.*" Paul at Antioch, in  Pisidia,  declares,  that  through  Jesus  was  proclaimed  the remission of sins; and by him all that believe are justified from all things. Ananias commanded Paul to arise and be immersed, and to wash away his sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. Thus it is spoken of in the acts of the Apostles. 
2. ***In the Epistles**.* — The Romans are said to have been immersed into Christ Jesus — into his death; to have been buried with him, and consequently to have risen with him, and to walk in a new life. The Corinthians are said to have been washed, justified, and sanctified by the name of the Lord Jesus and by the Spirit of our God. The Galatians "were immersed into Christ, and had put him on." The Ephesians were married to Christ, by immersion, as brides were wont to be washed in order to their nuptials. The assembly of the disciples, called *the congregation of the Lord,* making the bride of Christ, were said to be *cleansed* by *the bath of water* and *the word.* The Colossians were *buried with Christ, raised with him,* and are said to have been *forgiven all trespasses,* when they were raised with him, where their resurrection with Jesus and their having all sins forgiven are connected.61 All the saints are said to be saved by 

   immersion, or, "the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Spirit."62 The believing Jews had their hearts sprinkled 

from an evil conscience, and their bodies washed with clean water, or water which made clean. Peter taught all the saints in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia, that the water of baptism saved them, as water of the deluge saved Noah in the ark; and that in immersion a person was purged from all his former sins. And John  the  Apostle  represents  the  saved  as  having  "washed  their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb," and all the baptized little children as "having their sins forgiven." Such are the evidences found in the Epistles. How numerous! how clear! and how unequivocal! Are we not, then, warranted to say, Except a man be regenerated of water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God? and that all who, believing, are immersed for the remission of their sins, have the remission of their sins in and through immersion? 

