# Proposition 2

***In the house of God, there is always the table of the Lord.***

Just as there is a connection between the Jewish holy place and the Christian house of God, so too is there a connection between the furniture of the first tabernacle or holy place, and those who served in it; and the furniture of the Christian house of God, and those who serve in it. “In the first tabernacle,” Paul said, “which is called *holy*, there were the candlestick, the table, and the showbread,” or the loaves of the presence. On the golden table, every Sabbath day, *twelve* loaves were placed, displayed there for one week, and on the next Sabbath, they were replaced by twelve fresh loaves that were sprinkled with frankincense. The loaves that were removed from the table were eaten by the priests. In Hebrew, these were called "the loaves of the faces," or the loaves of the presence. This emblem of the abundance of spiritual food in the presence of God for all who dwell in the holy place was always on the golden table, provided by the twelve tribes, even in the wilderness. The light in the first tabernacle did not come from *outside*, but from the seven lamps placed on the golden candlestick; emblematic of the perfect light not derived from this world, which is enjoyed in the house of God.

If, then, in the symbolic house of God, which corresponds to the Christian house of God, there was not only a table overlaid with gold, always set, displaying *twelve large loaves*, or cakes, as sacred memorials and symbols of God's bounty and grace; can we say that in that house, presided over by Jesus as a Son, there is not always a table more precious than gold, covered with a richer feast for the holy and royal priesthood that the Lord has established, who may always enter into the holy place consecrated by Himself?

However, we do not rely solely on analogies or far-fetched inferences to prove this point. Paul, who fully understood both the Jewish and Christian institutions, tells us that there is in the Christian temple a table, appropriately called the Lord's Table, as part of its furnishings. He warns those who were in danger of being tainted by idolatry, “that they could not partake of the Lord's table and the table of demons.” In all his references to this table in this context, he describes it as continuously approached by those in the Lord's house. “The cup of the Lord” and “the loaf,” for which thanks were continually offered, are the furnishings of this table, to which the Christian community has free access.

The Apostle Paul reminds the saints in Corinth of their familiarity with the Lord's table, referring to it as something as common as the gatherings of the community. “The cup of blessing for which we give thanks to God, is it not the joint participation in the blood of Christ? The loaf that we break, is it not the joint participation in the body of Christ?” In this manner, we refer to things that are common and usual, never to things that are uncommon or unusual. It is not the cup that we *have* received with thanks; nor is it the loaf that we *have* broken; but which we *do* break. Yet, all that we are aiming for is now accomplished; for it has been shown that, *in the Lord's house, there is always the table of the Lord*. It is scarcely necessary to add that if it is shown that in the Lord's house there is the Lord's table as part of the furnishings, it must always be there unless it can be demonstrated that only some occasions require its presence, and others its absence; or that the Lord is poorer or more begrudging at one time than at another; that He is not always able to maintain a table, or too stingy to provide for His friends. But this is anticipating our subject, and we shall now proceed to the third proposition.