# Proposition 2

***The apostolic converts were addressed by their teachers as justified individuals.***

We know that only innocent individuals can be legally justified; however, the term is not used in the forensic sense by the Apostles. Among the Jews, it meant no more than *pardoned*; and when applied to Christians, it indicated that they were acquitted of guilt — released from condemnation, and regarded as righteous individuals in the sight of God.

Paul, in Antioch in Pisidia, assured the Jews that *in* or by Jesus, all who believed were justified from all things (here, it is certainly equivalent to being pardoned from all sins) that they could not be justified by the law of Moses. The disciples are said to be justified by faith.<sup>10</sup> By favor or grace.<sup>11</sup> *In* or *by* the blood of Christ.<sup>12</sup> By the name of the Lord Jesus.<sup>13</sup> By works.<sup>14</sup> It is God who justifies.<sup>15</sup>

Christians are said to be justified by God, by Christ, by favor, by faith, by the blood of Jesus, by the *name* of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God — also by works. Pardon and acquittal are the central ideas in every application of the term. God is the justifier. Jesus, as His Messiah, also justifies, and the Spirit declares it. As an act of favor, it is done, by *the blood of Jesus* as the rightful and effective cause — *by the faith* as the instrumental cause — by *the name* of Jesus the Lord as the immediate and connecting cause, and by *works* as the demonstrative and conclusive cause. Nothing is clearer from the above testimonies than that all Christians are declared to be justified under the Reign of Jesus Christ.