# Proposition 8

***The gospel contains a command, and as such must be obeyed.***

And here I need only ask, who are those who will be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord? Paul replies, 'They who do not know God, and *do not obey the gospel of his Son.*'<sup>29</sup> To 'obey the gospel,' and to 'become obedient to the faith,' were common phrases in the apostolic discourses and writings. 'By whom we have received apostleship, for the purpose of the *obedience of faith* among all nations, on account of his name.'<sup>30</sup> 'By the command of the everlasting God, the gospel is made known to all nations for the *obedience of faith.*'<sup>31</sup> 'A great number of the priests became obedient to the faith'<sup>32</sup> 'But they have not all obeyed the gospel;'<sup>33</sup> and, 'What will be the end of those who *do not obey the gospel*'?<sup>34</sup> From these statements, it is undoubtedly clear that either the gospel itself, considered as a whole, is a command, or that within it there is a command through the obedience of which salvation is obtained.

The obedience of the gospel is referred to as the obedience of faith, contrasted with the obedience of law. Faith in God's promise through Jesus Christ is the principle from which obedience flows. Presenting the gospel in the form of a command is an act of grace, because it engages the will and the affections of people, allowing them assurance of their salvation from which they would be necessarily excluded if no such act of obedience were possible.

Whatever the act of faith may be, it necessarily serves as the line of distinction between the two states described earlier. On one side, and on the other, humanity exists in entirely different conditions. On one side, they are pardoned, justified, sanctified, reconciled, adopted, and saved: on the other, they are in a state of condemnation. This act is sometimes referred to as immersion, regeneration, or conversion; and to ensure this act is clear to all, we will undertake some effort to affirm and illustrate it.

That a relationship or a state can be changed by an act is something I need hardly attempt to prove at this time; especially to those who understand that the acts of marriage, naturalization, adoption, and being born change the status of the subject of such acts. Rather than attempt to prove that a state is or may be changed by an act, I would rather ask if anyone has heard, knows, or can imagine a state being changed without some act. This point, being acknowledged by all rational beings, we assume does not require proof. However, a question may arise as to whether *faith* itself, or an act of obedience to some command or institution, is that act by which our state is changed.