# Proposition 9

***That it is not faith, but an act resulting from faith, which changes our state, we shall now attempt to prove.***

No relation in which we stand to the material world — no political relation, or relation to society — can be changed by believing, apart from the acts to which that belief, or faith, leads us. Faith never made an American citizen, though it may have been the cause of many thousands migrating to this continent and ultimately becoming citizens of these United States. Faith never made a man a husband, a father, a son, a brother, a master, or a servant, though it may have been essentially necessary to all these relations as a cause or a principle preparatory to them. Thus, when in scripture men are said to be justified by faith or to receive any blessing through faith, it is because faith is the principle of action and, as such, the cause of those acts by which such blessings are enjoyed. But the principle without those acts is nothing; and it is only by the acts that it induces us to perform that it becomes the instrument of any blessings to humankind.

Many blessings are metaphorically ascribed to faith in the sacred writings. We are said to be justified, sanctified, and purified by faith — to walk by faith and to live by faith, etc. However, these sayings, as clarified by the Apostles, mean no more than that by believing the truth of God *we have access* to all these blessings. So, as Paul explains, 'By faith *we have access* into the grace in which we stand.' He uses these words on two occasions, when speaking of the value of this principle in contrast with the principle of the law; and in his letter to the Hebrews, when he presents his cloud of witnesses to the excellence of this principle, he shows that *by it* the ancients obtained a commendable reputation — that is, as he explains, by their acts of faith in obedience to God's commands.

That faith by itself neither justifies, sanctifies, nor purifies is acknowledged by those who oppose immersion for the forgiveness of sins. They all include the idea of the *blood of Christ.* Yet they seem not to realize that by objecting to immersion as necessary for forgiveness in connection with faith, their own arguments prevent them from linking the blood of Christ with faith. If they admit that faith, apart from the blood of Christ, cannot obtain pardon, they admit everything necessary to prove their inconsistency in opposing immersion for the remission of sins, or immersion as that act by which our state is changed.

The Apostle Peter, when first delivering the gospel to the Jews, taught them that they were not forgiven their sins by faith but through an act of faith — by a believing immersion into the Lord Jesus. To make this clear to all, we shall examine his Pentecost address and his Pentecostian hearers.

Peter, now holding the keys of the kingdom of Jesus and speaking under the commission of converting the world by the authority of the Lord Jesus; guided, inspired, and accompanied by the Spirit — may be expected to speak the truth, the whole truth, plainly and understandably to his fellow Jews. He had that day declared the gospel facts and proved the resurrection and ascension of Jesus to the conviction of thousands. They believed and repented — believing that Jesus was the Messiah, had died as a sin-offering, was risen from the dead, and crowned Lord of all. Being filled with this faith, they inquired of Peter and the other Apostles *what they ought to do* to obtain remission. They were informed that although they now believed and repented, they were not pardoned; but must '*reform and be immersed for the remission of sins.*' Immersion for the forgiveness of sins was *the command* addressed to these believers, to these penitents, in answer to the most earnest question by one of the most sincere, candid, and honest speakers ever heard. This act of faith was presented as the means by which a change in their state could be effected; or, in other words, by which alone they could be pardoned. Those who "gladly received this word were that day immersed;" or, in other words, the same day they were converted, or regenerated, or obeyed the gospel. Those expressions, in the Apostle's style, when applied to people coming into the kingdom, denote the same act, as will be perceived from the various passages in the writings of Luke and Paul. This testimony, when the speaker, the occasion, and the congregations are all considered, is itself sufficient to establish the point in support of which we have presented it.

But the second discourse, recorded by Luke from the lips of the same Peter, pronounced in Solomon's Portico, is equally pointed, clear, and comprehensive in support of this position. After he had explained the miracles he had wrought in the name of the Lord Jesus and stated the same gospel facts, he proclaims the same command — "Reform and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out;" or, "Reform and turn to God, so that your sins may be blotted out; that seasons of refreshment from the presence of the Lord may come, and that he may send Jesus whom the heavens must receive until the fulfillment of all things which God has foretold," etc. Peter, in substituting other terms in this proclamation for those used on Pentecost, does not preach a *new* gospel but *the same* gospel in equally strong terms. He uses the same word in the first part of the command, which he used on Pentecost. Instead of "*be immersed,*" he has here "*be converted,*" or "*turn to God;*" instead of "*for the remission of your sins,*" here it is, "*that your sins may be blotted out;*" and instead of "*you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit,*" here it is, "*that seasons of refreshment from the presence of the Lord may come.*" On Pentecost, it was, 1st. "Reform." 2d. "Be immersed." 3d. "For the remission of sins." And 4th. "You shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit." In Solomon's Portico, it was, 1st. "Reform." 2d. "Be converted." 3d. "That your sins may be blotted out." And 4th. "That seasons of refreshment from the presence of the Lord may come;" that "you may have righteousness, peace, and joy in a holy spirit." So read the different clauses in those two discourses to the Jews, expressive of the same acts.

There is yet, in this discourse in the Portico, a very strong expression, declarative of the same gracious connection between immersion and remission. It is the last period in the discourse. "To you first, brethren of the Jews, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to *bless you,* every one of you, in the act of turning from your iniquities;" or, as we would say, in the act of conversion. Why the Apostle Peter should have used "converted," or "turning to God," instead of "be immersed," is, to the candid and unprejudiced reader of this narrative, very clear. After Pentecost, the disciples immersed on that day, *having turned to God* through Jesus, were spoken of by their brethren as *discipled* or *converted* to Jesus. The unbelieving Jews, soon after Pentecost, knew that the disciples referred to the immersed as "*converted;*" and immersion being the act of faith that drew the line of demarcation between Christians and Jews, nothing could be more natural than to call the act of immersion the converting of a Jew. The time between these discourses was long enough to introduce and familiarize this style in the metropolis; so that when a Christian said, "*Be converted,*" or "*Turn to God,*" every Jew knew that the act of putting on the Messiah was what was intended. After the immersion of some Gentiles into the faith in the house and neighborhood of Cornelius, it was reported that the Gentiles were converted to God. Thus, the Apostles, in passing through the country, brought great joy to the disciples among the Jews, "telling them of the conversion" or immersion of the Gentiles. Indeed, in a short time it became a summary way to represent the faith, reformation, and immersion of disciples by using one word for all. Thus, "All the inhabitants of Sharon and Lydda turned," or "were converted, to the Lord."

While on the subject of conversion, we shall present, as the fourth testimony, the words of the Lord Jesus to Paul when he called him. Paul is introduced by Luke in the Acts, recounting what the Lord said to him when he received his apostleship. "I send you, Paul, by the faith that concerns me, to open their eyes; to *turn* or *convert* them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among the sanctified." Everything to be accomplished among the Gentiles was to be achieved by the faith or truth in Christ. The Savior connected that with opening their eyes; their conversion from the ignorance and tyranny of sin and Satan; their forgiveness of sins; and finally, an inheritance among the saved or sanctified. First, faith or illumination; then, conversion; then, remission of sins; then, the inheritance. All these testimonies agree with each other in preaching the act of faith — Christian immersion, frequently called *conversion,* as that act inseparably connected with the remission of sins; or that change of state, of which we have already spoken.

One reason we wish to draw the reader's attention to the substitution of the terms *convert* and *conversion* for *immerse* and *immersion* in the apostolic discourses and in the sacred writings is not so much to prove that the forgiveness of sins, or a change of state, is necessarily connected with the act of faith called "Christian immersion," but to fix the minds of biblical students on a very important fact, namely, that no person is entirely discipled to Christ until he is immersed. It is true that this view bears strongly upon the question; but it also pertains to other significant matters concerning the present and ancient order of things.

Recognizing that much depends on having accurate views on this point, we have carefully examined all those passages where "conversion," either in the common version or in the new version or in the original, occurs; and have found a consistency in the use of this term, and its compounds and derivatives, which warrants the conclusion that no person was said to be converted until he was immersed; and that all persons who were immersed were said to be converted. If any apostatized and were again converted, it was in that sense in which our Lord applied the word to Peter, "When you are *converted,* strengthen your brethren," or as James used it in his letter when he said, "If any of you err from the truth and one convert him, let him know that he who converts a transgressor from the error of his way will save a soul from death and cover a multitude of sins."

The commission for converting the world teaches that immersion was necessary to discipleship; for Jesus said, "Convert the nations, immersing them into the name," etc. and "teaching them to observe," etc. The construction of the sentence fairly indicates that no person can be a disciple, according to the commission, who has not been immersed: *for the active participle in connection with an imperative either declares the manner in which the imperative shall be obeyed or explains the meaning of the command.* To this I have not found an exception: — for example. — "Cleanse the house, sweeping it." "Cleanse the garment, washing it," shows the manner in which the command is to be obeyed or explains its meaning. Thus, "Convert (or disciple) the nations, immersing them, and teaching them to observe," etc. expresses the manner in which the command is to be obeyed.

If the Apostles had only preached and not immersed, they would not have converted the hearers according to the commission; and if they had immersed and not taught them to observe the commands of the Savior, they would have been transgressors. A disciple, then, according to the commission, is one who has heard the gospel, believed it, and been immersed. A disciple, indeed, is one who continues to keep the commandments of Jesus.