# Conclusion

A word to the regenerated. — You have experienced the truth of the promise; and being introduced by that promise, you have become like Isaac, children of promise. You heard the testimony of God concerning Jesus of Nazareth, and you believed it. As a consequence of your faith, you became willing to put yourselves under his guidance. This faith and this willingness brought you to the water. You were not ashamed or afraid to confess him before men. You solemnly declared that you regarded him as God's only Son and the Savior of mankind. You vowed allegiance to him. Down into the water, you were led. Then the name of the Holy One was pronounced over your faith and upon your person. You were then buried in the water under that name. It closed around you. In its womb, you were concealed. Into the Lord, like in the water, you were immersed. But you continued not in the water. You were born from it and came forth, raised with Jesus, and rising in his strength. There your consciences were released; for there your old sins were washed away. And although you did not receive the gifts of the Holy Spirit, which confirmed the testimony of the first disciples, you felt the powers of the world to come, were enlightened, and tasted the bounty of God: for seasons of refreshment from the presence of God came upon you. Your hearts were sprinkled from evil consciences when your bodies were washed in the cleansing water. Then into the kingdom of Jesus, you entered. The King of righteousness, peace, and joy extended his scepter over you, and sanctified in state and in your whole being, you rejoiced in the Lord with joy unspeakable and full of glory. Being washed, you were sanctified as well as acquitted. And now you find yourselves under the great Advocate, so that sin cannot lord it over you; for you always look to the great Advocate to intercede for you; and thus, if sin should overtake you, you confess and forsake it, and always find mercy. Adopted into the family of God, you have not only received the name, the rank, and the dignity; but also the spirit of a child of God, and find, as such, that you are kings, priests, and heirs of God. You now feel that all things are yours because you are Christ's; and Christ is God's. The hope of the coming regeneration of the heavens and the earth, at the resurrection of the just, animates you. You look for the redemption, the adoption of your bodies, and their transfiguration. For this reason, you purify yourselves even as he is pure. Be zealous, then, children of God; proclaim the excellencies of him who has called you into this marvelous light and bliss. Be diligent, that you may receive the crown that never fades, and eat of the tree of life which grows in the midst of the Paradise of God. If you suffer with Jesus, you will reign with him. If you deny him, he will deny you. Add, then, to your faith courage, knowledge, temperance, patience, brotherly kindness, and universal benevolence; for if you continue in these things and increase, you shall not be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But if you are deficient in these things, your light will be obscured, and forgetfulness that you have been purified from your old sins will come upon you. Do, then, brethren, labor to make your calling and election sure; for in practicing these things, you shall never fall; but shall have an easy and abundant entrance into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

A word to the unregenerate. — Among you are various classes of character. Some of you who believe the gospel and have changed in heart, quickened by the Spirit, are not generally ranked among the unregenerate. In the popular sense of this term, you are regenerate. But we use it in its scriptural sense. Like Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea, you believe in Jesus and are willing to learn from him. You have confidence in his mission, respect, venerate, and even love his person; and you would desire to be under his governance. Do not marvel that I say to you, *You must be born again.* Pious as you are presumed to be, and as you may think yourselves to be, unless you are born again, you cannot enter the Kingdom of God. Cornelius and his family were as devout and pious as any of you. "He feared God, gave much alms to the people, and prayed to God continually." Yet, mark it well, I beseech you, it was necessary "*to tell him words* by which he and his house *might be saved.*" These words were told to him: he believed them, and received the Holy Spirit, yet still he must be born again. For a person cannot be said to be born again *of anything which he receives;* and even less of miraculous gifts of the Holy Spirit. He was immersed, and into the Kingdom of God he came. He was then saved. You need not ask how or why these things are so. Do as Cornelius did, and then you will see it in another light — then you would not for the world be unregenerate. To have the pledge, the promise, and seal of God of the remission of all your sins, to be adopted into his family, and to receive the spirit of a child of God, be assured, my pious friends, are matters of no everyday occurrence; and when you feel yourselves thoroughly invested with all these blessings in God's own way, you will say, that "his ways are not our ways, nor his thoughts our thoughts; for as the heavens are higher than the earth, so are his ways higher than our ways, and his thoughts higher than our thoughts." It is hard to make a slave feel and act as a freeman. As difficult, we often find it, to make the unregenerate feel and know the value and importance of regeneration. But the regenerate would not be unregenerate for the universe.

God has one way of bestowing everything. We cannot gather grapes from thorns, nor figs from thistles. The reason is that they do not grow there. We can tell no other reason why they cannot grow there but that they do not grow there. We cannot have any blessing except in God's way of giving it. We cannot find wool except on the back of the sheep, nor silk except from the worm which spins it. Corn and wheat cannot be obtained except from the plants which yield them. Without the plant, we cannot have the fruit. This is the economy of the entire material system. And in the world of spirits and spiritual influences, is it not the same? Moral law is as unchangeable as the laws of nature. Moral means and ends are as inseparable as natural means and ends. God cannot bestow grace upon the proud, nor can he withhold it from the humble. He does not do it, and that is enough. He could shower down wheat and corn and give us rivers of milk and wine were it a question of mere power. But considering all together, his wisdom, power, and goodness, he cannot do it. So neither can he give us faith without testimony, hope without a promise, love without an amiable object, peace without purity, nor heaven without holiness. He cannot give to the unborn infant the light of the sun, the vivacity which the air imparts, nor the agility and activity which liberty bestows. He does not do it, and therefore, we say, he cannot do it. Neither can he bestow the blessings of the Reign of Heaven upon those who are the children of disobedience.

I know how reluctant people are to submit to God's government; and yet they must all bow to it at last. "To Jesus every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess." But they will object to bowing *now* and will devise excuses. They will tell me that all I said is true of natural and moral means and ends; but immersion is not a moral means, because God forgave sins and saved men before immersion was appointed. "It is a *positive,* and not a *moral* institution." And is there no moral influence connected with positive institutions? A *written* law is a positive institution; for moral law existed before written law. But because it has become a positive institution, has its moral power ceased? *The moral influence of all positive institutions is God's* **will** expressed in them. And it matters not whether it is the *eating* or *not eating* of an apple, the building of an altar, or building it with or without the aid of iron tools; the offering of a kid, a lamb, a bullock, or a pigeon: it is just as morally binding and has the same moral influence as "You shall honor your father and mother;" or "You shall not kill." It is **the will of God** in any institution that gives it all its moral and physical power. No man could now be pardoned as Abel was — as Enoch was — as David was — as the thief upon the cross was. These all lived before the *second* will of God was declared. He took away "*the first will,*" says Paul, "that he might establish the *second will,*" by which we are sanctified. We are not pardoned as were the Jews or the patriarchs. It was not until Jesus was buried and rose again that an acceptable offering for sin was presented in the heavens. By one offering of himself, he has perfected the conscience of the immersed or sanctified. Since his offering, a new institution for remission has been appointed. Do not flatter yourselves that God will save or pardon you except for Christ's sake; and if his name is not assumed by you, if you have not put him on, if you have not come under his advocacy, you do not have the name of Christ to plead, nor his intercession on your behalf — and therefore, for Christ's sake, you cannot be forgiven. Could Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, Aaron, think you, if they were living now — could they, I ask, find forgiveness at the altar? And will you imagine that he who honored every institution by Moses, connecting rewards and punishments with the obedience or disobedience of his commands, would be less jealous for the honor of the institution of his Son? And will that Son who, for no other purpose than to honor his Father's institution, was immersed in the Jordan, bestow pardon or salvation upon any who refuse to honor him and him that sent him? He has graciously pleased to adapt means to ends. He has commanded immersion for the remission of sins; and do you think that he will change his institutions because of your stubborn or intractable dispositions? You might as well reasonably pray for loaves from heaven, or manna, because Israel ate it in the desert, as to pray for pardon while you refuse the remission of sins by immersion.

Do not hesitate because of the simplicity of the thing. Remember how simple it was to eat the fruit of that tree, "whose mortal taste brought death into the world and all our woe." How simple was the rod in the hand of Moses, when stretched over Egypt and the Red Sea? How simple was looking at the brazen serpent? And how simple are God's institutions? How simple the substances of nature; — the poisons too, and their remedies? Where the will of God is, there is omnipotence. It was simple to speak the universe into existence. But God's will gives efficacy to everything. And obedience was, and ever will be, the happiness of man. It is the happiness of heaven. It is God's philanthropy which has given us something to obey. To the angels who sinned, he has given no command. It was gracious to give us a command to live — a command to reform — a command to be born again — to live forever. Remember light and life first came by obedience. If God's voice had not been obeyed, the waters would not have brought forth the earth, nor would the sun have blessed it with his rays. The obedience of law was goodness and mercy; but the obedience of faith is favor, and life, and everlasting glory. None to whom this gospel is announced will perish, except those who know not God and obey not the gospel of his Son. Kiss, then, the Son, lest he be angry, and you perish forever.

To the unregenerate of all classes, whose education and prejudices compel them to assent to the testimony of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Paul, Peter, James, and Jude. — You acknowledge the mission of Jesus from the bosom of the Eternal — and that is *all* you do! Each of you is living without God, and without hope in the world — aliens from the family of God — of various ranks and grades among men; but all involved in one condemnation, because light has come into the world, and you love darkness and the works of darkness rather than light. To live without hope is bad enough; but to live in constant dread of the vengeance of Heaven is even worse. But do you not tremble at the word of God?

If you can be saved here or hereafter, then there is no meaning in language, no pain in the universe, no truth in God — death, the grave, and destruction have no meaning. The frowns of Heaven are all smiles if you do not perish in your ways.

But you purpose to bow to Jesus, and to throw yourselves upon his mercy at last. Impious thought! When you have given the strength of your intellect, the vigor of your constitution, the warmth of your affections, the best energies of your life, to the world, the flesh, and the devil; you will stretch out your palsied hands and turn your dim eyes to the Lord and say, "Lord, have mercy upon me!" The first fruits and fatlings of the devil, the lame and the blind for God, is the purpose of your heart and the best resolution you can form!

The thief upon the cross, had he done so, could not have found mercy. It is one thing to know the way of salvation, to assent to it, and to have in deliberate resolution rejected it for the present, with a promise of obeying it at some future time; and to have never known it, or assented to it, to the end of life. Do not promise yourselves what has never happened to others. The devil has always said, "You may give *tomorrow* to the Lord — only give to me *today.*" This has been all he has asked, and this is what you are inclined to give. Do not promise *tomorrow* to the Lord, for you will be even less disposed to give it when it comes; and the Lord has not asked you for *tomorrow.* He says, **today**, when you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. But you say you are willing to come to the Lord *today* if you knew the way, or if you were *prepared!* Well, what does the Lord require of you as *preparation?* He once said, "Let the wicked man forsake his ways, and the unrighteous man his thoughts; and let him turn to the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him; and to our God for he will abundantly pardon." He also says, "Draw near to me, and I will draw near to you;" "Cleanse your hands, you sinners; and purify your hearts, you men of two minds;" "Wash yourselves, make yourselves clean; put away the evil of your doings;" "Reform and be converted;" "Turn to the Lord;" "Be immersed for the remission of your sins;" and "Submit to the government of Jesus." "What! Just as I am!" Pray, how are you? Have you such a persuasion in your heart of the mission of Jesus, as God's own Son and the only Savior; and have you so much confidence in his personal character, as to be willing to surrender yourself to him for the present and future — for time and eternity? "I have," you say. As one who has heard his voice, I say, then, Come and be regenerated, and seasons of refreshment from the Lord will come to you.

"But I thought I ought to feel like a Christian first, and to have the experience of a Christian before I came to the Lord." Indeed! Did the Lord tell you so? "His ministers taught me so." It is hard to know who are his ministers nowadays. His *commissioned* ministers did not teach you that. They were not taught to say so. The Master knew that to wait for health before we go to the physician — to seek for warmth before we approach the fire — to wait until we cease to be hungry before we approach the table — was unreasonable. And therefore he never asked, nor expected, anyone to feel like a Christian before he was immersed and began to live like a Christian. None but the citizens of any country can experience the good or evil of the government that presides over it. None but the married can experience the conjugal relation and feelings. None but sons and daughters can have the experience of being sons and daughters; and none but those who obey the gospel can experience the blessings of obedience. I need not add, that none but the disobedient can experience the pains, fears, and terrors of the Lord — the shame and remorse which are the first fruits of the anguish and misery that await them in another world. Just as the disobedient, who stumble at the word, have the first fruits of the awful destruction from the presence of the Lord that awaits them; so the obedient have the first fruits of the Spirit — the salvation of their souls, as an earnest of the salvation to be revealed at the coming of the Lord.

And now let me ask all the unregenerate, What do you propose to achieve by either delaying or refusing to come to the Lord? Will delaying help to fit you or prepare you for his salvation? Will your lusts have less power, or sin have less dominion over you, by continuing under their control? Has the intoxicating cup diminished in taste by indulgence? Has the avarice of the miser been weakened or cured by yielding to it? Has any propensity been destroyed by gratifying it, in any way other than how it might destroy the physical system? Can you then promise yourselves that by continuing in disobedience, you will love obedience, and be more inclined to submit when you have resisted the Spirit of God longer? Do not presume upon the mercy of God, but enter in the way that mercy flows. Grace has its channels, just as waters have their courses; and it has its path, as the lightning in the clouds. Each has its law, which is as fixed as the throne of God; and do not think that God will work a miracle for your salvation.

Do you think that the family of Noah could have been saved if they had refused to enter the Ark? Could the firstborn of Israel have escaped the destroying angel, except in houses sprinkled with blood? Or could Israel have escaped the wrath of Pharaoh, except by being immersed into Moses in the cloud and in the sea? These things are written for our admonition, upon whom the consummation of past ages has come. Arise, then, and be immersed and wash away your sins, calling upon the name of the Lord. The *many* *who refuse grace* will neither prove you wise nor safe in disobedience.

- Multitudes are no mark  
   
   That you will rightly be found;  
   A few were saved in the Ark,  
   For many millions drowned.  
   Obey the gospel call,  
   
   And enter while you may;  
   
   Christ's flock have long been small,  
   Yet none are safe but they.  

***Effects of Modern Christianity***

Our greatest objection to the systems which we oppose is their impotence on the heart. Alas! what multitudes of prayerless, saintless, Christless, joyless hearts have crowded Christianity out of the congregations by their experiences before baptism! They seem to have had all their religion before they professed it. They can relate no experience since baptism, comparable to that professed before the "mutual pledge" was tendered and received.

It was the undeniable proofs of the superabundance of this fruit that caused me first to suspect the far-famed tree of evangelical orthodoxy. That cold-heartedness — that stiff and mercenary formality — that tithing of mint, anise, and dill — that negligence of mercy, justice, truth, and the love of God, which stalked through the communions of sectarian altars — that apathy and indifference about "*thus saith the Lord*" — that zeal for human prescriptions — and, above all, that willing ignorance of the sayings and doings of Jesus Christ and his apostles, which so generally appeared first of all created, fostered, and matured my distrust in the reformed systems of evangelical sectaries. Communion, to me, was communion of kindred souls immersed into one God, that celestial magnet which turns our aspirations and adorations to him who washed us from our sins in his own blood, and made us kings and priests to God.

To sit in the same pew; to gather around the same pulpit; to put our names to the same covenant, or subscription list: to contribute for a weekly sermon; to share the same opinions extracted from the same creed, has always appeared to me unworthy bonds of union or communion, and therefore my soul abhorred them as substitutes for the love of God shed abroad in the heart, for the communion of the Holy Spirit. "If a man would give all the substance of his house as a substitute for love, it should be utterly contemned."

The Divine Philosopher preached reformation by addressing himself to the *heart.* We begin with the heart. "Make the tree good," and then good fruit may be expected. But this appears to be the error of all sects to a greater or lesser degree; they set about *mending* the heart as a preliminary to that which alone can *create a new heart.* Jesus gives us the philosophy of his scheme in an address to a sinner of that time — "Your sins," says he, "are forgiven you: go, and sin no more." He first changes the sinner's state, not external but internal, and then says, "*Go and sin no more.*" He frankly forgave the debt. The sinner loved him.

There was much of this philosophy in question — "*Who loves most* — he that was forgiven five hundred pence, or he that was forgiven fifty? How much does he love who is not forgiven at all?" Aye, that question brings us onward a little to the reason why the first act of obedience to Jesus Christ should be baptism into his name, and that for the remission of sins.

But now we speak of the exercises of the heart. While any man believes the words of Jesus, "Out of the heart proceed the actions which defile the man," he can never lose sight of the heart, as the object on which all evangelical arguments are to terminate, and as the *fons et principium,* the fountain and origin of all piety and humanity.

Once for all, let it be distinctly noted that we appreciate nothing in religion which does not tend directly and immediately, proximately and remotely, to the purification and perfection of the heart. Paul acts the philosopher fully once, and, if we recollect correctly, but once, in all his writings upon this subject. It has been for many years a favorite topic for me. It is in his first epistle to Timothy — "Now the end of the commandment is love out of a pure heart — out of a good conscience — out of faith unfeigned." Faith unfeigned brings a person to remission or a good conscience; a good conscience precedes, in the order of nature, a pure heart; and that is the only soil in which love, that plant of celestial origin, can grow. This is our philosophy of Christianity — of the gospel. And thus it is the wisdom and power of God to salvation. We proceed upon these as our principles in all our reasoning, preaching, writing — 1st. unfeigned faith; 2nd. a good conscience; 3rd. a pure heart; 4th. love. The testimony of God, when apprehended, produces unfeigned or genuine faith; faith obeyed produces a good conscience. This Peter defines to be the use of baptism, the answer of a good conscience. This produces a pure heart, and then the consummation is love — love to God and man.

Paul's order or arrangement is adopted by us as infallible. Testimony — faith unfeigned — remission or a good conscience — a pure heart — love. Preaching, praying, singing, commemorating, meditating, all issue here. "Happy are the pure in heart, for they shall see God."

***Immersion Not a Mere Bodily Act***

Views of baptism as a mere external and bodily act exert a very injurious influence on the understanding and practice of men. Hence, many ascribe to it so little importance in the Christian economy. "Bodily exercise," says Paul, "profits little." We have been taught to regard immersion in water, into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, as an act of the whole man; — body, soul, and spirit. The soul of the intelligent subject is as fully immersed *into the Lord Jesus* as his body is immersed *in the water.* His soul rises with the Lord Jesus, as his body rises out of the water; and into one spirit with all the family of God, he is immersed. It is not like circumcising a Hebrew infant or proselyting a Gentile adult to Moses. — The candidate, believing in the person, mission, and character of the Son of God, and willing to submit to him, immediately upon recognizing him, hastens to be buried with the Lord and to rise with him, not corporeally but spiritually with his whole soul.

Reader, be admonished how you speak of bodily acts in obedience to divine institutions. Remember Eve, Adam, and all transgressors on the one hand. Remember Abel, Noah, Enoch, Moses, Abraham, down to the harlot Rahab, on the other; and be cautious how you speak of bodily acts! Rather remember the sacrifice of a body on Mount Calvary, and do not talk lightly of bodily acts. There are no such things as outward bodily acts in the Christian institution; and even less so in the act of immersion. Then it is that the spirit, soul, and body of man become one with the Lord. Then it is that the power of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit comes upon us. Then it is that we are enrolled among the children of God, and enter the ark, which will, if we abide in it, transport us to the Mount of God.

***Justification Ascribed to Seven Causes***

In examining the New Testament, we find that a man is said to be "***justified by faith**,*" Rom. 5:1; Gal. 2:16; Gal. 3:24. "***Justified freely by his grace**,*" Rom. 3:24; Titus 3:7. "***Justified by his blood**,*" Rom. 5:9. "***Justified by works**,*" James 2:21; James 2:24-25. "***Justified in or by the name of the Lord Jesus,***" 1 Cor. 6:11. "***Justified by Christ**,*" Gal. 2:16. "***Justified by knowledge**,*" Is. 53:11. "It is God that justifies," Rom. 8:33, viz: by these *seven* means — by Christ, his name, his blood, by knowledge, grace, faith, and by works. Are these all literal? Is there no room for interpretation here? He that selects *faith* out of *seven* must either act arbitrarily or show his reason; but the reason does not appear in the text. He must reason it out; he must infer it. Why, then, assume that faith *alone* is the reason for our justification? Why not assume that the *name* of the Lord alone is the great matter, seeing his name "is the only name given under heaven by which any man can be saved;" and men "who believe receive *the remission of sins by his name:*" and especially, because the name of Jesus, or of the Lord, is mentioned more frequently in the New Testament in reference to all spiritual blessings than anything else? Call all these *causes* or *means* of justification, and what then? We have the grace of God as the *moving* cause, Jesus Christ for the *efficient* cause, his blood the *procuring* cause, knowledge the *disposing* cause, the name of the Lord the *immediate* cause, faith the *formal* cause, and works for the *concurring* cause. For example: a gentleman on the seashore spots the wreck of a vessel at some distance from land, driven out into the ocean, covered with a miserable and perishing, sea-drenched crew. Moved by pure philanthropy, he sends his son in a boat to save them. When the boat arrives at the wreck, he invites them in, on the condition that they submit to his guidance. Some of the crew stretch out their arms, and seizing the boat with their hands, spring into it, take hold of the oars, and row to land, while some, from cowardice, and others due to difficulties in reaching the boat, wait in expectation of a second trip; but before it returns, the wreck went to pieces, and they all perished. The *moving* cause of the salvation of those who escaped was the good will of the gentleman on the shore; the son who took the boat was the *efficient* cause; the boat itself was the *procuring* cause; the knowledge of their perilous condition and his invitation was the *disposing* cause; the act of seizing the boat with their hands and springing into it was the *immediate* cause; their consenting to his condition was the *formal* cause; and their rowing to shore, under the guidance of his son, became the *concurring* cause of their salvation. — Thus men are justified or saved by grace, by Christ, by his blood, by faith, by knowledge, by the name of the Lord, and by works. But of the *seven* causes, *three* of which are purely instrumental, why choose *one* of the instrumental causes and emphasize it as the justifying or saving cause, to the exclusion of or in preference to the others? Every one in its own place is essentially necessary.

If we examine the word *saved* in the New Testament, we shall find that we are said to be saved by as many causes, though some of them differently denominated, as those by which we are said to be justified. Let us see: we are said to be "saved by grace," Eph. 2:5; "saved through his life," Rom. 5:9-10; "saved through faith," Eph. 2:8, Acts 16:31; "saved by baptism," 1 Peter 3:21; or "by faith and baptism," Mark 16:16; or "by the washing of regeneration and renewal of the Holy Spirit," Titus 3:5; or "by the gospel," 1 Cor. 15:2; or "by calling upon the Lord," and by "enduring to the end," Acts 2:21, Rom. 10:13, Matt. 10:22. Here we have salvation ascribed to grace, to Jesus Christ, to his death and resurrection — *three* times to baptism, either by itself or in conjunction, once with faith, and once with the Holy Spirit; to works, or to calling upon the Lord, or to enduring to the end. To these, we might add other phrases nearly similar, but these encompass all the causes to which we have just alluded. Saved by grace is the *moving* cause; by Jesus is the *efficient* cause; by his death, resurrection, and life is the *procuring* cause; by the gospel is the *disposing* cause; by faith is the *formal* cause; by baptism is the *immediate* cause; and by enduring to the end, or persevering in the Lord, is the *concurring* cause.

***Peter in Jerusalem, Paul in Philippi, Reconciled***

Thousands ask Peter, *What shall we do?* The jailer asks Paul, *What shall I do?* **to be saved**, if the reader pleases. Peter says, "Reform and be baptized every one of you," etc. Paul answers, "Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you shall be saved, you and your family." How is this, Paul and Peter? Why do you not preach the same gospel and answer the same question in the same or similar terms? Paul, do you preach another gospel to the Gentiles than Peter preached to the Jews? What say you, Paul? Paul replies — "Listen, but hear me. Had I been in Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost, I would have spoken as Peter did. Peter spoke to believing and penitent Jews; I spoke to an ignorant Roman jailer. I got his attention after the earthquake, by simply announcing that there was salvation for him and all his family, through belief in Jesus." — But why did you not mention repentance, baptism, the Holy Spirit? "Who told you I did not?" Luke adds nothing about it; and I concluded you said nothing about it. — Luke was a faithful historian, was he not? "Yes, very faithful; and why did you not faithfully listen to his account? Does he not immediately add that as soon as I got the jailer's ear, I *spoke the word of the Lord to him, and to all that were in his house?*" Why you reason like a Paidobaptist. You think, do you, that the jailer's children were saved by his faith! I spoke the whole gospel, or word of the Lord to the jailer and his family. In speaking *the word of the Lord,* I mentioned repentance, baptism, remission, the Holy Spirit, the resurrection, judgment, and eternal life: else why should I have baptized him and all his house; and why would he have rejoiced afterwards with all his family! Paul, I beg your pardon. I will not interrogate Peter, for I know how he will respond: he would say — "Had I been in Philippi, I would have spoken to an ignorant Pagan as Paul did, to show that salvation flowed through faith in Jesus; and when he believed this and repented, I would *then* have said, 'Be baptized for the remission of your sins.'"