# 1. Fact

*Fact* means something done. The term *deed,* so common in the reign of James the First, is equivalent to our term *fact.* Truth and fact, though often confounded, are not the same. All facts are truth, but all truths are not facts. That God exists, is a truth, but not a fact; that he created the heavens and the earth, is a fact and a truth. That Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, is a truth, but not a fact; and that he preached Christ to the Gentiles is both a fact and a truth. The simple agreement of the terms of any proposition with the subject of that proposition, or the representation of anything as it exists, is a truth. But something must be done, acted, or effected, before  we  have  a  fact.  There  are  manythings  true  in  religion, morals, politics, and general science, which are not facts; but these are all but the correspondence of words and ideas with the things of which they treat. 

Facts have a power which logical truth has not; and therefore, we say, that facts are stubborn things. They are *things,* not *words.* The power of any fact, is the meaning; and therefore the measure of its power is the magnitude of its import. All moral facts have a moral meaning; and those are properly called moral facts, which either exhibit, develop, or form moral character. All those facts, or works of  God,  which  are  purely  physical,  exhibit  what  have  been commonly called his natural or physical perfections; and all those facts or works of God, which are purely moral, exhibit his moral character.  It  so  happens,  however,  that  all  his  works,  when properly understood, exhibit both his physical and moral character, when  viewed  in  all  their  proper  relations.  Thus  the  deluge exhibited  his  power,  his  justice,  and  his  truth;  and  therefore, displayed both his physical and moral grandeur. The turning of water into wine, apart from its design, is purely a demonstration of physical power; but when its design is apprehended, it has a moral force equal to its physical majesty. 

The work of redemption is a system of work, or deeds, on the part of Heaven, which  constitutes the most splendid series of moral facts which man or angel ever saw. And they are the proof, the argument, or the demonstration, of that regenerating proposition which presents God and *love* as two names for one idea. 

When  these  facts  are  understood,  or  brought  into  immediate contact with the mind of man, as a moral seal or archetype, they delineate the image of God upon the human soul. *All the means of grace are, therefore, only the means of impressing this seal upon the  heart;  of  bringing  these*  *moral  facts  to  make  their  full impression on the soul of man.* Testimony and faith are but the channel through which these facts, or the hand of God, draws the image on the heart and character of man. If then the fact and the testimony are both the gift of God, we may well say that faith and eternal life are also the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

To  enumerate  the  gospel  facts  would  be  to  narrate  all  that  is recorded of the sayings and doings of Jesus Christ, from his birth to his coronation in the heavens. They are, however, concentrated in a few prominent ones, which group together all the love of God in the gift of his Son. He died for our sins, He was buried in the grave, He rose from the dead for our justification, and is ascended to the skies to prepare mansions for his disciples, comprehend the whole, or are the heads to the chapters which narrate the love of God, and display his moral majesty and glory to our view. 

These moral facts unfold all the moral grandeur of Jehovah, and make Jesus the effulgence of his glory, the express image of his substance. These are the moral seal which *testimony* conveys to the understanding, and *faith* brings to the hearts of sinners, by which God creates them anew, and forms them for his glory. It is the Spirit which bears witness — the Spirit of God and of Christ which gives the testimony, and confirms it in the disciples. But let us next proceed to *testimony.*
