# 9. Religion for Man, Not Man for Religion

Religion, as the term imports, began after the Fall; for it indicates a previous apostasy. A remedial system is for a diseased subject. The primitive man could love, wonder, and adore as angels now do, without religion; but man, fallen and apostate, needs religion in order to his restoration to the love, and worship, and enjoyment of God. Religion,  then, is  a system  of means of reconciliation — an institution for bringing man back to God — something to bind man anew to love and delight in God. [1] 

It consists of two departments; — the things that God has done for us,  and  the  things  that  we  must  do  for  ourselves.  The  whole proposition of necessity in this case, must come from the offended party.  Man  could  propose  nothing,  do  nothing  to  propitiate  his Creator,  after  he  had  rebelled  against  him.  Heaven,  therefore, overtures; and man accepts, surrenders, and returns to God. The Messiah is a gift, sacrifice is a gift, justification is a gift, the Holy Spirit is a gift, eternal life is a gift, and even the means of our personal sanctification is a gift from God. Truly, we are saved by *grace.*  Heaven,  we  say,  *does*  certain  things  for  us,  and  also *proposes* to us what we should do to inherit eternal life. It is all of God: for he has sent his Son; he has sent his Spirit; and all that they have done, or shall do, is of free favor; and the proposition concerning our justification and sanctification is equally divine and gracious as the mission of his Son. We are only asked to accept a sacrifice which God has provided for our sins, and then the pardon of them, and to open the doors of our hearts, that the Spirit of God may come in, and make its abode in us. God has provided all these blessings for us,  and only requires us to accept of them freely, without any price or idea of merit on our part. But he asks us to *receive* them cordially, and to give up our hearts to him. 

It is in the kingdom of grace, as in the kingdom of nature. Heaven provides the bread, the water, the fruits, the flowers; but we must gather and enjoy them. And if there be no merit in eating the bread which Heaven has sent for physical life and comfort, neither is there  merit  in  eating  the  bread  of  life  which  came  down  from heaven for our spiritual  life and consolation. Still, it  is true, in grace, as in nature — that he that eats shall not die. Hence, there are conditions of enjoyments, though no conditions of merit, either in nature or grace. We shall therefore speak in detail of *the things which God has done,* and of *the things that we must do,* as essential to our salvation. First, of the things that God has done: —  

<sub>1:  The  verb  *religio,*  with  all  its  Latin  family,  imports  a  *binding again,* or *tying fast* that which was dissolved.</sub>
