# 11. The Attributes of a True Sin-Offering

A single action or event often involves, in weal or woe, a family, a nation, an empire. Who can count the effects or bearings of the elevation  or  fall  of  a  Cesar,  a  Hannibal,  a  Napoleon?  A  single victory, like that of Zama, or of Waterloo; a single revolution, like that of England, or America, sometimes involves the fortunes of a world. Neither actions nor events can be appreciated but through their bearings and tendencies upon every person and thing with which they come in contact. The relations, connections, and critical dependencies  in  which  persons  and  actions  stand  are  often  so numerous and so various, that it is seldom, or perhaps, at all, in the power of man to calculate the consequences, or the value of one of a thousand of the more prominent actions of his life. 

Who could have estimated, or who can estimate, the moral or the political bearings of the sale of Joseph to a band of Ishmaelites — of the exposure of Moses in a cradle of rushes on the Nile — of the anointing  of  David  king  of  Israel — of  the  schism  of  the  twelve tribes under Rehoboam — of the treachery of Judas, the martyrdom of Stephen, the conversion of Paul, the accession of Constantine the Great, the apostasy of Julian, the crusades against the Turks, the reformation of Luther, the revival of letters, or any of the great movements of the present day? How difficult, then, is it to estimate the rebellion of Satan, the fall of Adam, the death of Christ, in all their bearings upon the destinies of the universe! 

Before a remedy for sin could either be devised or appreciated a knowledge  of  its  bearings  upon  God  and  man,  upon  time  and eternity, upon heaven and earth, is an indispensable prerequisite. But who possesses this knowledge, or what uninspired man can attain  it?  At  best  we  know  but  in  part;  and,  therefore,  can  but partially  explain  anything.  How  difficult,  then,  to  form  a satisfactory view of sin and its remedy — of the fall of Adam and the death of Christ! 

It  would,  however,  greatly  aid  our  conceptions  of  the  death  of Christ, and illustrate the nature and use of *sin-offerings,* could we obtain  just  and  scriptural  views  of  sin  in  its  necessary consequences,  or  in  its  prominent  bearings  upon  the  universe. Indeed, some knowledge of these aspects of sin is essential to our perception and appreciation of the wisdom, justice, and grace of the Christian system. It is not enough that we entertain a few vague and indistinct notions of its tendencies, or of the attitudes in which it stands to God, ourselves, and our fellows: we must have clear and definite views of the relations in which God stands to us, and we to him and to one another, and how sin affects us all in these relations: for that it bears a peculiar aspect to each of us in all these relations will, we doubt not, be conceded without debate. 

God  stands  in  diverse  relations  to  the  intellectual  and  moral creation. He is our Father, our Lawgiver, and our King. Now his feelings as a father, and his character as a lawgiver and sovereign, are  equally  involved  in  the  bearings  and  aspects  of  sin.  The influence of sin upon ourselves is also various and multiform. It affects the heart the conscience, the whole soul and body of man. It alienates our affections, and even works hatred to our minds both towards God and man. As an ancient adage says, "We hate those we have injured;" and having offended God our Father, we are, for that very reason, filled with enmity against him. It also oppresses and pollutes the conscience with its guilt and dread, and enslaves the passions as well as works the destruction of the body. It also alienates man from man, weakens the authority and destroys the utility of the law; and, if not subdued, would ultimately subvert the throne and government of God. If not restrained and put down, it would fill the universe with anarchy and disorder — with universal misery and ruin. 

To go no farther into details, it may, on the premises already before us, be observed: — 1st. That every sin wounds the affection of our heavenly Father — 2d. Insults and dishonors his law and authority in the estimation of his other subjects — 3d. Alienates our hearts from him — 4th.  Oppresses  our  conscience  with  guilt  and  dread — 5th. Severs us from society by its morbid selfishness and disregard for man — 5th.  Induces  to  new  infractions  and  habitual  violations  of right — And, 7th. Subjects us to shame and contempt — our bodies to the  dust,  and  our  persons  to  everlasting  destruction  from  the presence of the Lord. 

Not as the full tale, but rather as a specimen of the loss sustained, and  of  the  mischief  done,  by  our  transgression,  we  have  made these seven specifications. These only serve to show in how many aspects  sin  must  be  contemplated  before  we  can  form  a  just estimate of a suitable and sufficient sin offering or remedy. 

Now,  so  far  as  we  have  been  able  to  trace  the  tendencies  and bearings of transgression in the above enumeration, we must find in the *sin offering* a remedy and an antidote which will fully meet all  these  aspects;  otherwise  it  will  be  utterly  valueless  and unavailing  in  the  eye  of  enlightened  reason,  as  well  as  in  the righteous judgment of God, to expiate sins, to put it away, and to prevent its recurrence. 

Need, we demonstrate that man himself cannot furnish such a sin offering! Need we again propound Micah's question — "Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow myself before the high God? Shall I come before him, with burnt offerings; with calves of a year old? Will the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or with ten thousands  of  river  of  oil?  Shall  I  give  my  first  born  for  my transgression; the fruit of my body for the sin of my soul." Will repentance for the past, and future amendment place things as they were; raise the murdered dead; repair wasted fortunes, and recruit broken constitutions? Will tears, and groans, and agonies, honor a violated law, sustain a righteous government, vindicate the Divine character, and prevent future and further enormities? Have the ever done it? Can they ever do it? Surely, we shall be excused for not attempting to prove that we have neither a tear, nor a sigh, nor an agony, nor a lamb, nor a kid of our own creation, to offer to the Lord, even were such a sacrifice available to meet all the bearings of the case! 

Every transgression, even the least, the eating of a forbidden apple, subjects the transgressor to destruction. One sin, of one man, has involved the whole race in death. The life of the transgressor is demanded in the very mildest accents of insulted justice. Hence, in the law of the typical sin offerings, we find it thus written: "The *life* of the flesh is in the *blood:* and I have given it to you upon the altar, to make an atonement for your souls: **for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul.**"1 But such blood, such lives as  the  law  required  could  not,  Paul  and  Common  Sense  being judge, take away sin. They could only prefigure a *life* and a *blood* that could  truly, and justly, and honorably  expiate it. Thus,  *the death of Christ* is forced upon our attention by the law, by the prophets, by the necessity of the case, enlightened Reason being in the chair, as the only real, true, and proper sin-atoning offering. It does, indeed, meet not only the above seven particulars, but all others which have occurred to the human mind; and thus secures the union and harmony of things on earth, and of things in heaven, in the inviolable bonds of an everlasting brotherhood. 

1. "In bringing many sons to glory," it soothes and delights the wounded love of our kind and benignant heavenly Father— 
2. "It  magnifies  and  makes  honorable"  his  violated  law  and insulted government— 
3. It reconciles our hearts thoroughly and forever to God, as a proof  and  pledge  incontrovertible  of  his  wonderful  and incomprehensible love to us— 
4. It effectually relieves our conscience by "cleansing us from all sin," and produces within us a divine serenity, a peace and joy "unspeakable and full of glory"— 
5. It also reconciles us to our fellows, and fills us with brotherly affection and universal benevolence, because it makes us all one in faith, in hope, in joy, as joint heirs of immortality and eternal life— 
6. It is the most effectual guard against new infractions of the divine law, and superlatively deters from sin, by opening to us its diabolical nature and tremendous consequences; showing us in the person of God's only begotten and well beloved Son, when a sin offering, the impossibility of escape, from the just and  retributive  punishment  of  insulted  and  indignant Heaven — and  
7. It is a ransom from death, a redemption from the grave, such a deliverance from the guilt, pollution, power, and punishment of sin,  as  greatly  elevates  the sons  of God above all that they could have attained or enjoyed under the first constitution. It presents a new creation to our view; — new heavens, new earth, new  bodies,  new  life,  new  joys,  new  glories.  He  that vanquished death by dying, who now sits upon the throne says, "Behold, I make all things new." "He has become the Author of an eternal salvation to all that obey him." 

Let no one imagine that in this exemplification of the aspects in which sin and sin offerings must be contemplated before we can rationally  judge  of  the  necessity,  the  suitableness,  and  the sufficiency of the death of Christ, we have attempted to present a full view of these aspects. We are incompetent to the task. The life is  too  short,  and  our  opportunities  too  limited,  to  learn  all  the bearings  of  transgression  upon  ourselves,  the  throne  and government  of  God,  and  his  other  subjects.  We  only  intend  a specimen of the points to be met in a proper sin offering. These put it  out  of  the  reach  of  all  human,  of  all  angelic,  of  all  created mediators, victims, or sacrifices to expiate sin. So far as we can comprehend this wonderful subject, we are more and more deeply penetrated  with  the  conviction,  that  nothing  inferior  to  the voluntary sacrifice of the Son of God, could put away sin; and make it both just, and merciful, and honorable, and safe, on the part of his God and Father, to forgive and save one of his rebel race.  Nor  would  it  then  have  been  just,  according  to  our conception, to  have compelled him to bear our iniquities, or to suffer the just for the unjust; to inflict on an innocent person, the chastisement of our offences; but it was both just and kind on the part  of  our  heavenly  Father,  to  accept  for  us  the  voluntary surrender of his Son, as a willing sacrifice for our sins. "Thanks be to God, for his unspeakable gift!" 

**1 Lev. 17: 11.** 
