# Proposition 1

***There is a house on earth, called the house of God.***

The most high God does not dwell in temples made by human hands; yet He chose, in the age of types, to have a temple built for Himself, which He called His house, and filled it with symbols of His presence. In reference to this, the Christian community, organized under the leadership of His Son, is called His house and temple. "You are God's building," Paul says to a Christian community. This building is said to be "built upon the Apostles and Prophets — Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone." "Do you not know that you are the temple of God? The temple of God is holy, which temple you are."1

But in reference to the Jewish temple, the Christian church occupies the space between the outer court and the holiest of all. "The holy places made with hands were figures of the true." The common priests went *always* into the first tabernacle or holy place, and the high priest went *once a year* into the *holiest of all*. Thus, our Great High Priest went *once for all* into the true "holiest of all," into the real presence of God, and has allowed us Christians, as a royal priesthood, as a chosen race, to enter always into the only holy place now on earth — the Christian church. "As living stones we are built up into a *spiritual house*, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices most acceptable to God through Jesus Christ."2

But all we aim to show is that the community under Christ is called "*the house of God.*" Paul sometimes refers to it as *a* house of God, and at other times as *the* house of God. An individual or single congregation, he calls "*a house of God.*"3 I have written to you, "that you may know how to behave yourself in a house of God, which is the congregation of God."4 And in his letter to the Hebrews 5:1-14, speaking of the whole Christian community, he calls it the house of God.6 "Having a Great High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near," etc. It is, then, clear that there is under the Lord Messiah, now on earth, an institution called *the house of God*; and this resembles the *holy place* between the outer court and the holiest of all, which is the position to be proved.
