# Preface to the Second Edition

**This** edition replaces the first part of the last with a series of essays on the Christian System and expands upon the second part. The ongoing misrepresentation and misunderstanding of our views on some very fundamental points of the Christian system seem, at this crucial moment, to necessitate a clear, precise, and coherent presentation of the main outlines and elements of the Christian Institution. This is especially relevant to a significant question that we anticipate will soon become the central issue of Protestant Christendom, namely — *How can schisms end, allowing all Christians to unite, harmonize, and cooperate in one great community, as in the beginning?*

Ecclesiastical matters are advancing towards a new resolution. The Christian system is currently being scrutinized in ways that are entirely unprecedented since the time of the major defection. Such an era is always marked by extremes; however, things will organize themselves and settle down on the true foundation. "Many are running to and fro," and certainly knowledge is increasing.

The Christian system, as presented in the following essays, would have been more systematically and thoroughly developed, were it not for the specific essays on the "Kingdom of Heaven," "Remission of Sins," "Regeneration," and "Breaking the Loaf." Some points are only briefly discussed in the new essays because they've been addressed in detail in those previously published articles. We have indeed aimed primarily at providing a general overview, leaving the important details on the most contentious points for those essays.

Instead of the "Dialogue on the Holy Spirit," which is widely read and extensively discussed, we have included a few essays on **Church Order** as part of the Christian system. In this way, we strive to make the book as beneficial as possible to those seeking a more profound understanding of our achievements in Christian knowledge. We speak only for ourselves; and while we are always willing to articulate our faith and understanding of the Christian system, we firmly reject the proposition of dogmatically asserting our own views, or those of any fallible human, as a prerequisite or foundation for church union and cooperation. Therefore, while we would, if we could, express all that we believe and all that we know to the ends of the earth, *we accept the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible, as the foundation of all Christian union and communion.* Those who disagree with this are welcome to show us a more excellent way.

A. CAMPBELL.

**BETHANY**, Va. June 13, 1839.