***Proposition 3 – On the Lord's table there is of necessity***  

***but one loaf.*** 

The necessity is not that of a positive law enjoining one loaf and only one, as the ritual of Moses enjoined twelve loaves. But it is a necessity arising from the meaning of the Institution as explained by  the  Apostles.  As  there  is  but  one  literal  body,  and  but  one mystical or figurative body having many members; so there must be but one loaf. The Apostle insists upon this, 'Because there is one loaf, we, the many, are one body; for we are all partakers of that one  loaf.'8  The  Greek  word  *artos,*  especially  when  joined  with words of number, says Dr. Macknight, always signifies *a loaf,* and is  so  translated  in  our  Bibles,  'Do  you  not  remember  the  *five loaves?*'9 There are many instances of the same sort. Dr. Campbell says, "that in the plural number it ought always to be rendered loaves;" but when there is a numeral before it, it indispensably must be rendered a loaf or loaves. Thus we say one loaf, seven loaves; not one bread, seven breads. 'Because there is one loaf,' says Paul, we must consider the whole congregation as one body. Here the Apostle reasons from what is more plain, to what is less plain;  from  what  was  established,  to  what  was  not  so  fully established in the minds of the Corinthians. There was no dispute about the one loaf; therefore, there ought to be none about the one body. This mode of reasoning makes it as certain as a positive law: because that which an Apostle reasons from must be an established fact,  or  an  established  principle.  To  have  argued  from  an assumption or a contingency to establish the unity of the body of Christ,  would  have  been  ridiculous  in  a  logician,  and  how unworthy of an Apostle! It was, then, an established institution, that there is but one loaf, inasmuch as the Apostle establishes his argument  by  a  reference  to  an  established  fact.  Our  third proposition is, then, sustained that *on the Lord's table there is of necessity but one loaf.* 

