# 3. God

"**I am that** **I am**." "I lift up my hand to heaven and say, *I live forever.*" "The *everlasting God,* the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, does not grow faint or weary; there is no limit to his *understanding.*" "His understanding is infinite." "Do not I *fill* heaven and earth, says the Lord?" "For thus says the *high* and *lofty* one that *inhabits eternity,* whose name is *Holy,* I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." "I beseech you, show me your *glory,* and he said I will make all my goodness pass before you; and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before you; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show mercy." "And the Lord passed by before him [1] and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sin, and that by no means clears the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation" — "and showing mercy to thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments." "O Lord God of Israel, who dwells between the cherubim, you are the God, even *you alone,* you have made heaven and earth. Hear, O Israel — Jehovah our God is one Jehovah [2] — the Lord our God is one Lord." "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, who was, and is, and is to come." "Great and marvelous are your works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are your ways, you king of saints." "Who shall not fear you, O Lord, and glorify your name, for you alone are holy," "He is the Rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment; a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he." "Glorious in holiness, fearful in praise, doing wonders."

Such are a few — a sample of the Divine declarations concerning himself; repeated and echoed by the purest and most intellectual beings in heaven and earth. It is from his word and his works we learn the being and perfections of God. Just as we form a character of a person from what they say and what they do, we learn the Divine character. "The heavens declare his glory, and the firmament shows forth his handiwork: day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge." Creation reveals the power, the wisdom, and the goodness of God. Providence also proclaims his justice, truth, and holiness. Redemption develops his mercy, condescension, and love; and all these are again characterized by infinity, eternity, and immutability. Nature, then, attests and displays the knowledge, wisdom, power, and goodness of God. The law and the providence of God especially declare his justice, truth, and holiness — while the gospel unfolds his mercy, condescension, and love; and all these proclaim that God is infinite, eternal, and immutable. God appears before the universe of intellects, in the threefold role of Creator, Lawgiver, and Redeemer; and although each of these involves and reveals many of his excellencies, still in each role three are most prominent. As Creator, knowledge, wisdom, power, and goodness; as Lawgiver, justice, truth, and holiness; as Redeemer, mercy, condescension, and love. In each and all of these roles, he is infinite, immutable, and eternal.

But the Scriptures speak of his divinity or godhead, as well as of the unity, spirituality, and eternity of his being. We have not, indeed, said much about this incomprehensible theme; for — who by searching can find out God, or know the Almighty perfectly? The knowledge of him is as high as heaven, what can you do? deeper than hell, what can you know? The measure of it is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea.

Paul and Peter indeed speak of the divine nature in the abstract, or of the divinity or godhead. These are the most abstract terms found in the Bible. Eternity and divinity are, however, equally abstract and almost equally rare in holy writ. Still, they are necessarily found in the divine volume; because we must abstract *nature* from *person* before we can understand the remedial system. For the divine nature may be communicated or imparted in some sense; and indeed while it is essentially and necessarily singular, it is certainly plural in its personal manifestations. Hence we have the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit equally divine, though personally distinct from each other. We have in fact, but one God, one Lord, one Holy Spirit; yet these are equally possessed of one and the same divine nature.

Some conceive of God as a mathematical unit; and as a thing cannot be both mathematically singular and plural, one and three, at the same time and in the same sense, they deny the true and proper divinity of the Son of God and of the Spirit of God. But it seems to us that they reason not in harmony with the sacred style of inspiration. But why should we imagine that there cannot be a plurality of personal manifestations in the divine nature any more than in the angelic or human, especially as man was created in the image of God?

The *relations* in human plurality are indeed limited to *three.* For while all human nature was at one time originally and wholly in the person of Adam, it was afterwards found equally in the person of Eve — and again in the person of their firstborn. Now as to its derivation and mode of existence, it was diverse in the three. In Adam it was underived as it pertains to human nature, in Eve it was derived from Adam, and in Cain it was again derived from Adam and Eve. Here the matter ends; for while Eve proceeded from Adam in one way, and Cain proceeded from Adam and Eve in another, all the rest of human nature is participated without any new relation or mode of impartation. While, then, our nature is plural as to its participation, it is limited to three relations or modes of existence. Now as man was made in the image of God, we must conceive of him as having plurality, relation, and society within himself — though far be it from us to suppose that the divine nature either is, or can be fairly or fully exhibited by any resemblance or illustration drawn from angels or from humans, or from any created thing. Still, there is a resemblance between God and the sun that shines upon us — between God and an angel — between God and man; and even in the mode of his existence, and in the varieties of relation and personal manifestation, there is so much resemblance as to firmly forbid all dogmatism as to what is, or is not, compatible with the unity, spirituality, and immutability of God. But of this more fully and clearly when we shall have examined the record concerning the **word** and the **spirit** of God.

- 1: Moses.
- 2: So reads the Hebrew. Deut. 6:4
