# 4. The Son of God

“The holy child that will be born of you shall be called *the Son of God.*" "For to us a child is born; to us a son is given, and the government will be on his shoulders, and his name will be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." "This is my Son, the beloved, in whom I delight." "This is my Son, the beloved; listen to him." "No one has ascended into heaven except the one who came down from heaven, the Son of Man, who is in heaven," or whose home is in heaven. "God so loved the world that he gave his *only begotten Son;* the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." "No one has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, has made him known." "Rabbi, you are the Son of God; you are the king of Israel." "Glorify me with your own self, with the glory I had with you before the world existed." "In him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead<sup>1</sup> bodily," or substantially. "He is the first and the last." "All things were created by him and for him." "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. All things were made through him, and without him nothing was made that was made." "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory: the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth."

So speak the Divine oracles of the supreme Deity and excellence of the author and perfecter of the Christian faith. "By him and for him" all things were created; and "he is before all things, and by him all things hold together." But "he became flesh." Who? He who existed before the universe, whose mysterious, sublime, and glorious title was the **Word** of God. Before the Christian faith, before the *relationship* of "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit" began, his rank in the divine nature was that of the **Word of God**. Wonderful name! Intimate and dear relationship! The relationship between a word and the idea it represents is the closest of all relationships in the universe: for the idea is in the word — and the word is in the idea. The idea is invisible, inaudible, unintelligible, except in and through the word. An idea cannot exist without an image or a word to represent it — and therefore God was never without his word, nor was his word without him. "The Word was with God, and the Word was God" — for a word is the idea *expressed* — and thus "the Word that became flesh" became "the brightness of his glory" and "the *exact representation* of his being," so that "he who has seen the Son has seen the Father also."

While, then, the phrase "Son of God" denotes a temporal relationship, the phrase "the Word of God" denotes an eternal, unoriginated relationship. There was a *Word of God* from eternity, but the Son of God began to be in the days of Augustus Caesar. "You are my Son; today I have begotten you." He was declared to be the Son of God with extraordinary and divine power and evidence by his resurrection from the dead. The **Word** incarnate or dwelling in human flesh is the person called our Lord and Redeemer, Jesus Christ — and while, in the system of grace, the Father is the *one God,* in all the supremacy of his glory — Jesus is the *one Lord* in all the divine fullness of sovereign, supreme, and universal authority. The Lord of Shem, of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, is the God and the Lord of Christians: for "the child" that has been born to us — and "the son" that has been given, according to another prophet, came from eternity. "His origins are from of old, from everlasting."<sup>2</sup> Such is the evangelical history of the author of the Christian faith regarding his antecedent nature and relationship in the Deity or Godhead.

He became a true and proper **Son of Man.** "A body you have prepared for me." But the "me" existed before "the body." It dwelt forever "in the bosom of the Father." "I came forth from God," said "the Incarnate Word." Great beyond expression and "without controversy, great is the mystery — the secret of godliness." "God was manifest in the flesh." "He who has seen me has seen the Father also." The Son of Man was and is the Son of God — "Emmanuel, God with us." Adored be his name! The one God in the person of the Father has commanded all people to worship and honor the one Lord, as they would honor him who sent him: for now in glorifying the Son, we glorify the Father who sent him and who dwells in him. "Do you not know that I am in the Father, and the Father is in me?" Thus spoke our Lord Jesus Christ.

<sup>1</sup>: The Apostle here used the word *Theotees.* Col. 2:9, which is found only once in the New Testament. We have, indeed, *Theiotees,* Rom. 1:20, from the same Apostle, also found only once, translated "*Godhead.*" We also have *Theios, Theion,* three times; once in Acts 17:29, translated divinity, and by Peter, (2 Pe 1:3-4), twice, once in connection with *power* and once with *nature.* "His divine power" — "a divine nature." "The fullness of the Deity," or Godhead, indicates all divine excellence — all the perfections of God. The term *Deity* refers to the divine nature, state, or being of God. "The *fullness*" of that divine nature is here contrasted with an *empty* and deceitful philosophy, (verse 8,) and the term *bodily* added shows that God is in Christ not as he was in the tabernacle or temple, typically, but substantially, literally, and truly.

<sup>2</sup>: Mic 5:2.
