# 5. The Spirit of God

Just as there is humanity and the spirit of humanity, there is God and the spirit of God. They can exist separately and distinctly. "What man knows the things of a man," says Paul, "but the spirit of man that is in him; even so the things of God knows no man but the Spirit of God." In this case, there is an image of God in humanity — not an exact image, but an image; for as Paul says of the law, so we say of humanity: "For the law had a shadow, (a resemblance) of good things to come, and not the very (or exact) image of the things." So humanity was made in the image of God, though not the exact image — the active power of humanity is in its spirit: just as John the Baptist came in the *power* of Elijah, because he came in his *spirit*. The spirit of God is therefore often referred to as his power; though it is not an impersonal power, but a living, energizing, active, personal existence. Hence, in all the works of God, the spirit of God is the active, operating agent. Thus, in the old creation, while ancient chaos still remained — when "the earth was without form, and void, and darkness was over the face of the deep," "the spirit of God moved" — (incubated and energized) — "upon the face of the waters." "The hand of the Lord has made me, and the spirit of the Almighty has given me life." "The Holy Spirit shall come upon you, and the *power* of the Highest shall overshadow you;" and thus chaos was subdued, humanity was vitalized, "the heavens were adorned," and the body of Jesus was formed by the spirit of God.

The Spirit is said to do, and to have done, all that God does and all that God has done. It is attributed with all divine perfections and works; and in the New Testament, it is identified as the immediate author and agent of the new creation and of the holiness of Christians. It is therefore called *the Holy Spirit*. In the sublime and ineffable relationship of the Deity, or Godhead, it stands next to the Incarnate Word. In ancient times, or before time, it *was* **God**, the **Word** of God, and the **Spirit** of God. But now, in the development of the Christian plan, *it is* "the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit" — one God, one Lord, one Spirit. For us Christians, there *is*, then, but one God, even the Father; and one Lord Jesus Christ, even the Savior; and one Spirit, even the Advocate, the Sanctifier, and the Comforter of Christ's body, the church. Jesus is the *head*, and the Spirit is the *life* and animating principle of that body.

The entire systems of creation, providence, and redemption are founded upon these relationships in the Deity. Destroy these, blend and confuse these, and nature, providence, and grace are blended, confused, and destroyed. The unmatched and supreme excellence of the Christian system is that it fully reveals to mortals the Divinity — the whole Godhead engaged in the work of humanity's regeneration and ultimate glorification. God is manifest in human flesh and is justified and glorified by the Spirit in accomplishing humanity's deliverance from ruin. Each name of the sacred three has its own unique work and glory in the three great works of Creation, Government, and Redemption. Hence, we are by divine authority, "immersed into the name of the **Father**, the **Son**, and the **Holy Spirit**," when entering the kingdom of grace; and while in that kingdom, the supreme blessing is — "The *Grace* of the **Lord Jesus Christ**, and the *love* of **God**, and the *communion* of the **Holy Spirit** be with you!" Indeed, in the old church that was in the wilderness, while matters were comparatively in the shadows of a moonlight age, the high priest of Israel was commanded to put "the *name* of God" upon the children of Israel — in the same relationship of the sacred three. "The Lord [1] bless you and keep you. The Lord make his face to shine upon you, and be *gracious* to you. The Lord lift up his countenance upon you, and give you peace." [2] Jehovah bless you — is equivalent to "the love of God." Jehovah be *gracious* to you corresponds to "the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ" — and Jehovah lift up his countenance upon you and give you peace corresponds to "the communion of the Spirit."

The divine doctrine of these holy and incomprehensible relationships in the Divinity is so woven and incorporated with all the parts of the sacred texts — so identified with all the dispensations of religion, and so essential to the mediatorship of Christ, that it is impossible to make any real and divine progress in the true knowledge of God — of humanity — of reconciliation — or remission of sins — of eternal life — or in the piety and divine life of Christ's religion — without a clear and distinct understanding of it, as well as a firm and unshaken faith and confidence in it, as we hope to make more evident in the following sections.


<sub>1: In the Hebrew Bible it is Jehovah each time.</sub>

<sub>2: Num 6:24-27.</sub>
