# 9. Religion for Man, Not Man for Religion

Religion, as the term implies, began after the Fall; for it indicates a prior apostasy. A remedial system is for a broken subject. Primitive humans could love, wonder, and adore as angels do now, without religion; but fallen and estranged humanity needs religion for restoration to the love, worship, and enjoyment of God. Religion, then, is a system of reconciliation — an institution for bringing humanity back to God — something to bind us anew to love and delight in God. [1]

It consists of two parts: the things that God has done for us, and the things that we must do for ourselves. The entire proposition of necessity in this case must come from the offended party. Humanity could propose nothing, do nothing to appease the Creator after rebelling against Him. Heaven, therefore, offers; and humanity accepts, surrenders, and returns to God. The Messiah is a gift, sacrifice is a gift, justification is a gift, the Holy Spirit is a gift, eternal life is a gift, and even the means of our personal sanctification is a gift from God. Truly, we are saved by *grace*. Heaven, we say, *does* certain things for us, and also *proposes* to us what we should do to inherit eternal life. It is all from God: for He has sent His Son; He has sent His Spirit; and all that they have done, or will do, is out of free favor; and the proposition concerning our justification and sanctification is equally divine and gracious as the mission of His Son. We are only asked to accept a sacrifice that God has provided for our sins, and then the forgiveness of them, and to open the doors of our hearts so that the Spirit of God may come in and dwell within us. God has provided all these blessings for us and only requires us to accept them freely, without any cost or notion of merit on our part. But He asks us to *receive* them wholeheartedly and to give our hearts to Him.

It is in the kingdom of grace, as in the kingdom of nature. Heaven provides the bread, the water, the fruits, the flowers; but we must gather and enjoy them. And if there is no merit in eating the bread that Heaven has sent for physical life and comfort, neither is there merit in eating the bread of life that came down from heaven for our spiritual life and consolation. Still, it is true, in grace, as in nature — that whoever eats shall not die. Hence, there are conditions for enjoyment, though no conditions of merit, either in nature or grace. We will therefore discuss in detail *the things which God has done,* and *the things that we must do,* as essential to our salvation. First, of the things that God has done: —

<sub>1: The verb *religio,* with all its Latin family, implies a *binding again,* or *tying fast* that which was dissolved.</sub>
