# 12. Christ: the Light of the World

As Abraham said to Isaac on his way to Mount Moriah, "God," my son, "will provide himself a lamb for the burnt offering," so it has come to pass. For the redemption of humanity from sin and all its penal consequences, God has provided a lamb as a sin offering. He sent his Son, who, upon coming into the world, said, "Sacrifice and offering you did not want, but a body you prepared for me; burnt offerings and sacrifices for sin you were not pleased with; then I said, Look, I have come to do your will, as it is written about me in the scroll." But he did more than offer himself as a sin offering; he was more than the Lamb of God; he was the "prophet of Jehovah," revealing to humanity the character and will of God. He disclosed secrets hidden from the foundation of the world. In one word, he is **the oracle**, as well as the **sacrifice** God provided for us.

As the **Incarnate Word**, he is the interpreter of God's will. The New Testament is then the gift of Christ—and was written under his guidance and inspiration. Everything the Spirit of God has done has been through his instrumentality. The Spirit is Christ's gift. Jesus is now as much "Lord of the Spirit" as he is Lord of life and glory. The New Testament is a volume written by his servants. Six of his Apostles and two of his Evangelists wrote it all. That book now stands in place of the personal presence of the Lord and his Apostles. He gave gifts to people after he left their presence. "He gave apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors, teachers." As a means of our salvation, as one of the things God has done for us, we place the New Testament, the living oracles, or gospel of Christ, next in order and importance to his sacrifice.

We always look to the sacrifice of Christ as the basis of our pardon; to his blood that cleanses from all sin, for justification and personal acceptance; and to his Word we look for counsel and instruction in Christian devotion and righteousness. We depend on his *Word* for light just as much as we depend on his *blood* for pardon. "I am," he said, "**the light of the world**; whoever follows me will never walk in darkness, but will have the *light of life.*" "In him was life, and that life was the light of all people." "That was the true light," said John, "which gives light to everyone coming into the world." "As long as I am in the world," Jesus says, "I am the light of the world." Thus Isaiah spoke of him: "I will also give you as a light to the Gentiles, that you may be my salvation to the ends of the earth." "I will give you as a covenant for the people, a light for the Gentiles, to open blind eyes, to bring prisoners out of the dungeon, and those who sit in darkness out of the prison house." "His going forth is prepared like the morning." "The sun of righteousness will rise with healing in its wings." "I testify," said Paul, "to both small and great, that the Messiah should bring light to the people and to the Gentiles." The Word of Christ is the light of Christ; therefore, the Christian Scriptures are the light of the world; and whoever follows them will have the light of life. "If you continue in my teaching," says the Messiah, "you will know the truth, and the truth will set you free." "If the Son sets you free, you will be truly free."
