# 14. Faith in Christ

The things done for us will truly be to us as though they were not, unless they are believed. Therefore, to the uneducated and unbelieving person, the universe is without a sin offering, a Sun of Righteousness, a Lord, Redeemer, and a Holy Spirit. Faith is necessary only as a means of attainment; as a means of enjoyment. It is not, then, an arbitrary requirement or demand, but a gracious means of salvation.

Faith in Christ is the result of belief. Belief is the *cause*; and trust, confidence, or faith *in* Christ, the *effect*. "*The faith,*" sometimes means *the truth* to be believed. Sometimes it means "*the belief of the truth;*" but here we speak of it metonymically, using the effect for the cause — or calling the effect by the name of the cause. To believe what a person says, and to trust in him are not always the same. True, indeed, they often are; for if a person speaks to us about himself, and states matters of great interest to us that require confidence in him, to believe what he says, and to believe or trust *in* him, are essentially one and the same thing. Suppose a doctor presents himself to someone who is sick, stating his ability and willingness to heal them; to believe is to trust in him and to put ourselves under his guidance; provided, of course, we prefer health over sickness, and life over death.

While, then, faith is the simple belief of testimony, or of the truth, and can never be more or less than that; as a *principle of action* it relates to a person or thing that is important to us: and is confidence or trust in that person or thing. Now the belief of what Christ says about himself leads to trust or confidence in him: and since the Christian religion is a personal matter, both in terms of *subject* and *object,* that faith in Christ which is essential to salvation is not the belief of any doctrine, testimony, or truth in the abstract, but belief *in* Christ; trust or confidence in him as a person, not a thing.<sup>1</sup> We take Paul's definition of the term and of the concept as perfectly simple, clear, and sufficient. For the term faith, he substitutes *the belief of the truth*. "God has from the beginning chosen you for salvation, through the sanctification of the Spirit; through the belief of the truth."<sup>2</sup> And of the concept, he says, "Faith is the *confidence* of things hoped for, the *conviction* of things not seen."<sup>3</sup> And John says it is "receiving testimony," for "If we receive the testimony of man," as a principle of action, or put trust in it, "the testimony of God is greater," and will, of course, produce greater confidence.<sup>4</sup> Any belief, then, that does not lead to our personal confidence in Jesus as the Christ, and induce trustful submission to him, is not genuine faith; but a dead faith, and cannot save the soul.

**1 See the Essay on the Foundation of Christian Union, on the terms *fact, testimony, faith, etc.*, where this subject is treated at large.**

**2 2 Th 2:13.  3 Heb. 11:1.  4 1 Jn 5:9.**
