# 15. Repentance

Repentance is a result of faith: for who that does not believe that God exists can have "repentance towards God"? Repentance is sorrow for sins committed; but it is more. It is a resolution to forsake them; but it is more. It is actual "ceasing to do evil, and learning to do well." This is "*repentance unto life,*" or what is truly called *reformation*. Such is the force of the command, "*Repent every one of you.*" It is not merely being sorry for what you have done wrong; nor is it resolving to do better; nor even trying to amend your ways: but it is actual amendment of life based on the views and motives that the gospel of Christ presents. Gospel repentance is the result of gospel light and gospel motive, and therefore, it is the effect, and not the cause, of belief in the testimony of God.

True repentance is, then, always completed in actual reformation of life. It therefore carries in its very essence the idea of restitution. For no one can genuinely disapprove of or reject their sinful course of life if they do not make amends for the wrongs they have done to the fullest extent of their ability. To God, one can make no restitution, except by making things right with His creatures whom they have harmed. If, then, anyone is convinced in their own mind that they have harmed the person, character, or property of their neighbor, by word or deed, and has the ability, by word or deed, to undo the evil they have done, or to restore what they have unjustly taken away, they will certainly do it if their repentance aligns with either the law of Moses or the Gospel of Christ. Otherwise, their repentance is of no value: for God cannot, without violating His own law and dishonoring His own character, forgive anyone who is aware of any sin they have committed against another person, unless to the fullest extent of their ability, they make good the injury they have done. Thus says the Lord, "If a soul sins and commits a trespass against the Lord, and lies to their neighbor in that which was entrusted to them to keep, or in fellowship (i.e., trading), or in anything taken away by violence, or has deceived their neighbor, or has found something that was lost and lies about it, or swears falsely; in any or all these that a person does, sinning therein: Then it shall be, because they have sinned and are guilty, that they shall *restore* what they took violently away, or the thing which they have *deceitfully gotten,* or that which was entrusted to them to keep, or that lost thing which they found, or all that about which they have sworn falsely, they shall restore it in the *principal,* and shall add a fifth part more to it, and give it to the person to whom it belongs, on the day of their trespass offering, and they shall bring their trespass offering to the Lord, and the priest shall make atonement for them before the Lord, and it shall be forgiven them." Leviticus 6:1-7. Sin offerings without repentance, and repentance without sin offerings, are equally ineffective before God. We sin against God whenever we sin against man; and therefore, after making all things right with man, we can only, through sacrifice, which makes the matter right with God, obtain forgiveness. To the same effect, Jesus says, Matt. 5:23-24, "Be reconciled to your brother," first make the matter right with him, "and then come and offer your gift."[^1]
