# 21. The Christian Hope

"Beloved, now we are the children of God; and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he appears, we shall be like him — for we shall see him as he is. And everyone who has this hope in him purifies himself just as he is pure." "God has predestined us to be conformed to the image of his Son." "I consider that the sufferings of this life are not worth comparing with the glory that will be revealed in us." "He has given us new birth into a living hope; into an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and will not fade away." So testify three Apostles — John, Paul, and Peter. The entire hope of the Christian can indeed be summed up in one sentence: "If children, then *heirs — heirs of God,* **joint heirs with Christ**." Immortality, eternal life, the riches of Christ, the glory, honor, wealth, and bliss of God's only begotten Son are to be equally shared with all his saints.

The remedial system is, therefore, a moral creation in progress — a new creation of people for good works, still advancing; but its culmination will be the solidifying of individual moral excellence through an instantaneous physical new creation of people at the resurrection of the righteous: or a manifestation of the children of God in full redemption from the entire burden of sin; raised, refined, immortalized, glorified, and endowed with eternal life.

Hope differs from faith in that it looks only forward to future objects. It does not look back, nor does it contemplate the present: "for," says Paul, "what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?" Nor does it focus on all the future; but only on future *good.* It desires and expects good and nothing else. There is not one dark cloud, not one dark spot, in all the skies of Christian hope. Everything seen in its vast dominion, in the limitless prospect ahead of us, is bright, uplifting, energizing, and transporting. It is all desirable and desired. It is all expected. It is all "eager expectation;" not a doubtful, but a "confident expectation of things" desirable, and to be "hoped for."

It is not what some in this age call "the hope," i.e., the desirable expectation of forgiveness for their past wrongs: for only those who are actually forgiven are the subjects of this hope. "If our heart condemns us, then indeed, we have no confidence;" thus no confident expectation, no hope of eternal life. The mere possibility of an event is no foundation for hope. Hope does not deal in possibilities, nor indeed much in probabilities — unless they are very strong probabilities. Conjectures, uncertainties, possibilities, probabilities, are not essential to Christian hope. It rests on covenants, charters, promises, oaths, offered by the Eternal Source of almighty truth and love. These are good securities and produce assurance. Hence, hope is the assurance of future good in expectation.

There are, indeed, various degrees of hope; but even the smallest degree of it includes desire combined with expectation. Things expected are not always desirable, nor are things desirable always to be expected: but hope embraces promises that are desirable and also expects the enjoyment of them. Hence, hope, like faith and love, can grow immensely. When based on the promises of God and on a habitual patient conformity to his will, it will keep pace with our growing understanding of the character of God; of the fullness and richness of the promises, and in the conviction of our actual devotion to the manifestations of that will.

But *the things hoped for* by the Christian are beyond description. Eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and the human heart has not conceived the glories of the resurrection of the righteous; — the new bodies, the new heavens, the new earth, the new Jerusalem, the new society, the new pleasures: for according to his promise we look for (expect) new heavens and a new earth in which righteous people alone shall dwell. Thus concludes the remedial system for all its blessed subjects. "It lifts the beggar from the dust, and the wretched from the ash heap, and sets them among princes, among the nobles of the universe;" the thrones, hierarchies, and lordships of the skies; in the presence of God, too, "where there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand, where there are pleasures forevermore." Such are the things to be done for those for whom such things have already been accomplished as constitute the remedial system: for with Paul we must say: "He who did not spare his own Son, but gave him up for us all; how will he not also along with him graciously give us all things?" "All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours; and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's."
