# 22. The Doom of the Wicked

There are two classes of people in this world. They are often and in various ways distinguished from each other. They are called the righteous and the wicked, the saints and the sinners, the holy and the unholy, the good and the bad, those who fear God, and those who do not. Many things are said about one class that are not said about the other. Of the first class, it is said that they are "in Christ," justified, sanctified, saved, children of God, heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ, an elect race, a royal priesthood, a peculiar people. Of the second class, these things are never mentioned in the Bible. They are not in Christ, not justified, not sanctified, not saved; they are children of the devil, "children of wrath," not an elect race, not a royal priesthood, not a peculiar people.

These individuals have not been reconciled to God through the sacrifice of his Son. They remain enemies of God in heart. For those who loved darkness rather than light, and would not accept God's Son as their Savior, he has appointed a day of judgment; a day for the ultimate destruction of ungodly people. Then they will perish "with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he comes to be glorified in all his saints, and to be admired by all the believers." Then the King will say to them on his left, "Depart, you cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels." They are allies of Satan in his rebellion against God and have spent their energies and resources on his side; therefore, it is reasonable that they should share their ultimate fate with him.

Of this judgment, Enoch, the seventh from Adam, prophesied, saying, "Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convict all that are ungodly among them of all their ungodly deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their harsh words which ungodly sinners have spoken against him." God had, long before the Christian era — from the foundation of the world, "*appointed a day*" in which he will judge **the world** (the whole world) righteously by Jesus Christ, whom he has appointed as Judge of all the dead as well as the living.

"It is, indeed, appointed for people once to die, and after this the judgment." The judgment that follows death is not the general but the specific judgment of individuals, as the phrase would suggest, whose spirits return to God and are judged and instantly rewarded, as far as in a separate state they can be subjects of reward or punishment. But the "*judgment of the great day*" serves another purpose: not, as some irreverently say, "to bring people out of heaven and hell to judge and send them back again;" but in the presence of an assembled world to vindicate the administration of God's moral government and providence, to reveal the true characters of angels and humans, and to pronounce an irrevocable sentence upon all according to their works. For, Paul says, "we must all appear before the tribunal of Christ, that each one may receive, *in his body,* the things he has done, whether good or bad." It is, then, because of the actual and public declaration and execution of this judgment that the last day is called "**the day of judgment**," and that the judgment itself is called "**the judgment of the great day**."

The final judgment and "*destruction of ungodly people*" is presented by the Lord himself, as well as by his Apostles, in the clearest and strongest terms, and in the boldest and most shocking imagery that human language and understanding can provide. Indeed, to fully present this awfully sublime and glorious day before the perceptive abilities of humanity is impossible. The best efforts have exhausted the powers of nature in all her usual energies. John, in his profound visions of the last acts of the great drama of human existence, says, "I saw a great white throne, and him who sat on it, from whose face earth and heaven fled away, and there was found no room for them. And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened: and another book was opened, which is called the Book of Life; and the dead were judged out of the things that were written in those books, according to their works. And the sea gave up the dead which were in it, and death and Hades gave up the dead which were in them; and they were judged each one according to his works: and death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death. And whoever was not found written in the **Book of Life** was cast into the lake of fire." Surely "it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God."

**1 Hades.**
