# 23. Summary of the Christian System of Facts

God alone is self-existent and eternal. Before the earth and time were created, he acted through his **Word** and his **Spirit**. **God, the** **Word of** **God**, and **the** **Spirit of** **God**, participants of one and the same nature, are the foundations of *Nature, Providence,* and *Redemption.* In *Nature* and *Providence,* it is **God**, the **Word**, and the **Spirit**. In *Grace,* it is the **Father**, the **Son**, and the **Holy Spirit**. All creations, providences, and remedial arrangements show us the cooperation of **three divine participants**, of one self-existent, independent, incommunicable nature. These are fundamental concepts of all the revelations and developments of the Divine, and necessary for all rational and sanctifying views of religion.

In the *Law* and in the *Gospel,* these sacred and mysterious relationships and personal manifestations of God are assumed as the basis of the whole process. "God created *all things* by Jesus Christ, and for him." "The Word was in the beginning with God," "before all things," and "by him all things hold together." "God created man upright." Man sinned: all became mortal: our nature became susceptible to evil. In this respect, it is fallen and depraved. "There is none righteous — no, not one." God the Father has chosen people in Christ for salvation "through the sanctification of the Spirit unto obedience, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus;" and "promised," to them, "eternal life before the foundation of the world."

Therefore, in "the fullness of time" — "in *due* time, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman" — for "the **Word** became flesh, and dwelt among us; and we beheld his glory, the glory as of an only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." "He showed us the Father." He died as a sin-offering — was buried, rose again on the third day — ascended to heaven — presented his offering in the true Holy Place — made atonement for our sins — "forever sat down on the right hand of the Supreme Majesty in the heavens" — sent down his Holy Spirit — inspired his Apostles, who "preached with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven" — persuaded many Jews and Gentiles that he was made "the author of eternal salvation to all who obey him." He commanded faith, repentance, and baptism to be preached in his name for the remission of sins to every nation and people under heaven.

All who "believe in him are justified from all things;" because this faith is living, active, operative, and perfected by "obeying from the heart that mold of doctrine delivered to us." Hence, such individuals repent of their sins and obey the gospel. They receive the Spirit of God and the promise of eternal life — walk in the Spirit, and are sanctified to God, and made heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ. They shall be raised from the dead incorruptible, immortal, and shall live forever with the Lord; while those "who do not know God, and do not obey the gospel of his Son, shall perish with an everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power."
