***ADDRESS TO THE CITIZENS OF THE KINGDOM.** Fellow Citizens,* 

Your rank and standing under the reign of the Prince of Peace have never  been  surpassed — indeed,  have  never  been  equaled  by  any portion of the human race. You have visions and revelations of God — his being and perfections — developments of the depths of his wisdom  and  knowledge,  of  the  counsels  of  his  grace,  and  the purposes of his  love, which  give  you an intellectual  and moral superiority  above  all  your  predecessors  in  the  Patriarchal  and Jewish ages of the world. Secrets of God, which were hid from ages and generations, have been revealed to you by the Apostles of the  Great  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  your  confession. — What Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, David, Isaiah, Daniel, and all the Prophets, down to John the Harbinger, rejoiced to anticipate, you have realized and enjoyed. The intellectual pleasures of the highest  and  most  sublime  conceptions  of  God  and  of  Christ vouchsafed to you, so far transcend the attainments of the ancient people of God, that you are comparatively exalted to heaven, and may enjoy the days of heaven upon earth. You have a book which contains not only the charter of your privileges, but which explains a thousand mysteries in the antecedent administrations of God over all the nations of the earth. In it you have such interpretations of God's past providences in the affairs of individuals, families, and nations,  as  open  to  you  a  thousand  sources  of  rational  and sentimental enjoyment from incidents and things which puzzled and perplexed the most intelligent and highly favored of past ages. Mountains are, indeed, leveled; valleys are exalted; rough places are made plain, and crooked ways straight to your apprehension; and, from these data, you are able to form more just conceptions of the present, and more lofty anticipations of the future, than fell to the  lot  of  the  most  highly  favored  subjects  of  preceding dispensations. And, indeed, so inexhaustible are the deep and rich mines  of  knowledge  and  understanding  in  the  Christian revelations, that the most comprehensive mind in the kingdom of heaven  might  labor  in  them  during  the  age  of  a  Methuselah, constantly  enriching  itself  with  all  knowledge  and  spiritual understanding,  and  yet  leave  at  last  vast  regions  and  tracts  of thought wholly unexplored. 

But this decided superiority over the most gifted saints of former ages you unquestionably enjoy. Among all the living excellencies with which they were acquainted, they wanted a perfect model of all human excellence. Bright as were the virtues and excellencies of an Abraham, a Joseph, a David, there were dark spots, or, at least, some blemishes in their moral character. They failed to place in living form before their contemporaries, or to leave as a legacy to posterity, every virtue, grace, and excellence that adorn human nature. But you have Jesus, not only as 'the image of the invisible God,' 'an effulgence of his glory, and an exact representation of his character;' but as a man, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sin,  exhibiting  in  the  fullest  perfection  every  excellence  which gives amiability, dignity, and glory to human character. You have motives  to  purity  and  holiness,  a  stimulus  to  all  that  is  manly, good, and excellent, from what he said and did, and suffered as the Son of Man, which would have added new charms and beauties to the most exemplary of all the saints of the olden times. 

Means  and  opportunities  of  the  highest  intellectual  and  moral enjoyments are richly bestowed on you, for which they sighed in vain: God having provided some better things for Christians than for  Jews  and  Patriarchs.  Shall  we  not,  then,  fellow  citizens, appreciate  and  use,  as  we  ought,  to  our  present  purity  and happiness, to our eternal honor and glory, the light which the Sun of  Righteousness  has  shed  so  richly  and  abundantly  on  us? Remember  that  we  stand  upon  Apostles  and  Prophets,  and  are sustained by Jesus, the light of the world, and the interpreter and vindicator of all God's ways to man in creation, providence, and redemption. All suns are stars; and he that is now to us in this life '*the Sun of Righteousness,*' in respect of the future is '*the Bright and Morning Star.*' Till the day of eternity dawn, and the day-star of immortality arise in our hearts, let us always look to Jesus. 

But it is not only the felicity of superior heavenly light, though that is most delectable to our rational nature, which distinguishes you the citizens of this kingdom; but that personal, real, and plenary remission of all sin,  which  you enjoy through the blood  of the Lamb  of  God,  bestowed  on  you  through  the  ordinances  of Christian immersion and confession of sins. 

The Jews, indeed, had sacrifices under the law, which could, and did take away ceremonial sins; and which so far absolved from the guilt  of  transgressing  that  law,  as  to  give  them  a  right  to  the continued enjoyment of the temporal and political promises of the national compact; but farther Jewish sacrifices and ablutions could not reach. — This benefit every Jew had from them. But as respected the conscience, Paul, that great commentator on Jewish sacrifice, assures us they had no power. 'With respect to the conscience,' says he, 'they could not make him who did the service perfect.' 

The entrance of the law gave the knowledge of sin. It gave names to particular sins, and 'caused the offence to abound.' The sacrifices appended to it had respect to that institution alone, and not to sin in general, nor to sin in its true and proper nature. The promise made to the patriarchs, and the sacrificial institution added to it, through faith  in  that  promise,  led  the  believing  to  anticipate  a  real sin-offering; but it appears the Jewish sacrifices had only respect to the Jewish institution, and, excepting their typical character, gave no new light to those under that economy on the subject of a true and *proper* remission of sins, through the real and bloody sacrifice of Christ. 

The Patriarch and the believing Jew, as respected a real remission of sins, stood upon the same ground; for, as has been observed, the legal  institution,  or,  as  Paul  says,  'the  supervening  of  the  law,' made no change in the apprehensions of remission, as respected the conscience. But a new age having come (for 'these ordinances for  cleaning  the  flesh  were  imposed  only  till  the  time  of reformation',)  and  Christ  having,  by  a  more  perfect  sacrifice, opened the way into the true holy places, has laid the foundation for perfecting the conscience by a real and full remission of sins, which, by the virtue of his blood, terminates not upon the flesh, but upon the conscience of the sinner. 

John, indeed, who lived at the dawn of the Reformation, preached reformation with an immersion for the remission of sins; saying that 'they should believe in him that was to come after him.' Those who believed John's gospel, and reformed, and were immersed into John's reformation, had remission of sins through faith in that was to come; but you, fellow-citizens, even in respect of the enjoyment of remission, are  greatly  advanced  above the  disciples  of John. You have been immersed, not only by the authority of Jesus, *as Lord of all,* into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy  Spirit,  but  *into  the  death*  or  sacrifice  of  Christ.  This  no disciple of Moses or of John knew anything about. This gives you an  insight  into  sin,  and  a  freedom  from  it,  *as  respects conscience* — a  peace  and  a  joy  unutterable  and  full  of  glory,  to which  both  the  disciples  of  Moses  and  of  the  Harbinger  were strangers. So that the light of the risen day of heaven's eternal Sun greatly  excels,  not  only  the  glimmerings  of  the  stars  in  the patriarchal age, and the faint light of the moon in the Jewish age, but even the twilight of the morning. 

Your new relation to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, into which you have been introduced by faith in the Messiah and immersion  into  his  death,  verifies,  in  respect  of  the  sense  and assurance of remission, all that John and Jesus said concerning the superiority of privilege, vouchsafed to the citizens of the kingdom of heaven. You can see your sins washed away in the blood that was shed on Mount Calvary. That which neither the highly favored John, nor any disciple of the Messiah could understand, till Jesus said '*it is finished,*' you not only clearly perceive, but have cordially embraced. You can feel, and say with all assurance, that 'the blood of Jesus Christ now cleanses you from all sin;' and that by faith you have access to the Mediator of the New Institution, and to the blood of sprinkling which speaks glad tidings to the heart. You have an Advocate with the Father; and, when conscious of any impurity,  coming  to  him  by  God,  confession  your  sins,  and supplicating pardon through his blood, you have the promise of remission. You now know how God is *just* as well as merciful, in forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. 

But  superior  light  and  knowledge,  and  enlarged  conceptions  of God,  with  such  an  assurance  of  real  and  personal  remission  as pacifies the conscience and introduces the peace of God into the heart, are not the only distinguishing favors which you enjoy in the new relation of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, into which you are introduced under the reign of Heaven; but you are formally *adopted*  *into  the  family  of  God,*  and  constituted  the  sons  and daughters of the Father Almighty. 

To be called '*the friend of God,*' was the highest title bestowed on Abraham; to be called the friends of Christ, was the peculiar honor of the disciples of Christ, to whom he confided the secrets of his reign; but to be called 'the children of God through faith in Jesus Christ,' is not only the common honor of all Christians, but the highest honor which could be vouchsafed to the inhabitants of this earth. Such honor have you, my fellow-citizens, in being related to the only-begotten Son of God: 'For as many as received him he gave the privilege of becoming the sons of God.' These, indeed, were not descended from families of noble blood, nor genealogies of high renown; neither are they the offspring of the instincts of the flesh,  nor  made  the  sons  of  God  'by  the  will  of  man,'  who sometimes adopts the child of another as his own; but they are 'born of God' through the ordinances of his grace. 'Behold how great love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the  children  of  God!'  'The  world,  indeed,  does  not  know  us, because it did not know him. Beloved, now are we the children of God. It does not yet appear what we shall be.' 

'Because you are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.' And if sons, it follows you 'are heirs  of  God  through  Christ' — the  heir  of  all  things.  Is  this, fellow-citizens, a romantic vision, or sober and solemn truth, that you  are  children  of  God,  possessing  the  spirit  of  Christ,  and constituted heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ of the eternal inheritance! What manner of persons, then, ought you to be! How pure,  how  holy  and  heavenly  in  your  temper;  how  just  and righteous in all your ways; how humble and devoted to the Lord; how joyful and triumphant in your King! 

Permit me, then, to ask, Wherein do you excel? — nay, rather, you will propose this question to yourselves. You will say, How shall we still more successfully promote the interest, the honor, and the triumphs of the gospel of the kingdoms? Is there anything we can do by our behavior, our morality, our piety, by our influence, by all the  earthly  means  with  which  God  has  furnished  us?  Is  there anything we can do more to strengthen the army of the faith, to invigorate the champions of the kingdom, to make new conquests for  our  King?  Can  we  not  increase  the  joy  of  the  Lord  in converting souls — can we not furnish occasions of rejoicing to the angels of God — can we not gladden the hearts of thousands who have never tasted the joys of the children of God? 

In the present administration of the kingdom of God, during the absence of the King, he has said to the citizens, 'Put on the armor of  light' — 'Contend  earnestly  for  the  faith' — 'convert  the world' — 'occupy till I come' — 'let your light shine before men, that they,  seeing  your  good  works,  may  glorify  your  Father  in heaven' — 'that the Gentiles may, by your good works, which they shall behold,  glorify  God in  the day  of visitation.'  He has thus entrusted  to  the  citizens  the  great  work  for  which  he  died — the salvation of men. Let us, then, brethren, be found faithful to the Lord and to men, that he may address us at his coming with the most acceptable plaudit, 'Well done, good and faithful servants; enter into the joy of your Lord!' 

Great as the opposition is to truth and salvation, we have no reason to despond. Greater are our friends and allies, and infinitely more powerful than all our enemies. God is on our side — Jesus Christ is our  King — the  Holy  Spirit  is  at  his  disposal — angels  are  his ministering  servants — the  prayers  of  all  the  prophets,  apostles, saints, and martyrs are for our success — our brethren are numerous and strong — they have the Sword of the Spirit, the shield of faith, the  helmet  of  salvation,  the  breastplate  of  righteousness,  the artillery  of  truth,  the  arguments  of  God,  the  preparation  of  the gospel  of  peace — our  Commander  and  Captain  is  the  most successful General that ever entered the field of war — he never lost a battle — he is wonderful in counsel, excellent in working, valiant in  fight — the  Lord  of  *hosts*  is  his  name.  He  can  stultify  the machinations of our enemies, control all the powers of nature, and subdue all our foes, terrestrial and infernal. Under his conduct we are like Mount Zion, that can never be moved. Indeed, under him we are come to Mount Zion, the strong hold and fortress of the kingdom, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to myriads of angels, the general assembly and congregation of the first born, enrolled in heaven — to God the Judge of all — to the spirits of  just  men  made  perfect — to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New Constitution — and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks such peace,  and  joy,  and  courage  to  the  heart.  Ought  we  not,  then, brethren, 'to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might?' If in faith, and courage, and prayer, we put on the heavenly armor, and march under the King, sounding the gospel trumpet, the walls of Jericho will fall to the ground, and the banners of the Cross will wave  over  the  ruins  of  Paganism,  Atheism,  Scepticism,  and sectarianism — *Nil desperandum, te duce, Christe.* If a Roman could say, 'Nothing is to be feared under the auspices of Cesar,' may not the Christian say, There is no despair under the guardianship of Messiah the King? 

But,  fellow-citizens,  though  clothed  with  the  whole  panoply  of heaven, and headed by the Captain of Salvation, there is no success in this war to be expected, without constant and incessant prayer. When  the  Apostles  began  to  build  up  this  kingdom, notwithstanding all the gifts they enjoyed, they found it necessary to devote themselves to prayer as well as to the ministry of the word. And when Paul describes all the armor of God, piece by piece, in putting it on he says, 'Take the Sword of the Spirit — with all supplication and deprecation, pray at all seasons in spirit, watch with all perseverance and supplication for all the saints.' 

This  was  most  impressively  and  beautifully  pictured  out  in  the wars of ancient Israel against their enemies. While Moses lifted up his holy hands to heaven, Israel prevailed; and when he did not, Amalek prevailed. So is it now. When the disciples of Christ, the heaven born citizens of the kingdom, continue instant in prayer and watchfulness, the truth triumphs in their hearts and in the world. When  they  do  not,  they  become  cold,  timid,  and  impotent  as Sampson shorn, and the enemy gains strength over them. Then the good cause of the Lord languishes. 

It is not necessary that we should understand how prayer increases our zeal, our wisdom, our strength, our joy, or how it gives success to the cause, any more than that we should understand how our food  is  converted  into  flesh,  and  blood,  and  bones.  It  is  only necessary that we eat; and it is only necessary that we should pray as  we  are  taught  and  commanded.  Experience  proves  that  the outward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day  by  our  daily  bread,  and experience  proves  that  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day prayer and thanksgiving. The Lord has promised his Holy Spirit to them that ask him in truth; and is it not necessary to our success? If it be not necessary to give new revelations, it is necessary to keep in  mind  those  already  given,  and  to  bring  the  word  written seasonably to our remembrance. Besides, if the Spirit of the Lord was necessary to the success of Gideon and Barak, and Sampson and David, and all the great warriors of Israel according to the flesh, who fought the battles of the Lord with the sword, the sling, and the bow; who can say that it is not necessary to those who draw the Sword of the Spirit and fight the good fight of faith? In my judgment it is as necessary now as then — necessary, I mean, to equal success — necessary to the success of those who labor in the word  and  teaching,  and  necessary  to  those  who  would  acquit themselves like men, in every department in the ranks of the great army of the Lord of hosts. 

Though the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, they are mighty (only, however, *through God,* to the overturning of strong holds,) to the overturning of all reasonings against the truth, and every high thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and in leading captive every thought to the obedience of Christ. Let us then,  fellow-citizens,  whether  as  leaders  or  as  private  soldiers, abound  in  prayer  and  supplications  to  God  night  and  day.  If sincere, and ardent, and incessant prayers to God for every thing that he has promised; for all things for which the Apostles prayed were offered us by all the congregations, and by every disciple in his family and in his closet, for the triumphs of the truth, then would  we  see  the  army  of  the  Lord  successful  in  fight  against atheism, infidelity, and sectarianism — then would we see disciples growing in knowledge and in favor with God and man. And is not the conversion of the world and our own eternal salvation infinitely worthy of all the effort and enterprise in man, seeing God himself has done so much in the gift of his Son and Holy Spirit, and left for us so little to do — nothing, indeed, but what is in the compass of our power? And shall we withhold that little, especially as he has given us so many and so exceedingly great and precious promises to  stimulate us to  exertion? Has  not Jesus  said, 'The conqueror shall inherit all things' — that he 'will not blot out his name out of the book of life' — that he will confess it before his Father and his holy angels — that he will place him 'upon his throne, and give him the crown of life that shall never fade away'? 

Rise up, then, in the strength of Judah's Lion! Be valiant for the truth! Adorn yourselves with all the graces of the Spirit of God! Put  on  the  armor  of  light:  and,  with  all  the  gentleness,  and meekness, and mildness there is in Christ — with all the courage, and patience, and zeal, and effort, worthy of a cause so salutary, so pure, so holy, and so divine, determine never to faint nor to falter till you enter the pearly gates — never to lay down your arms, till, with  the  triumphant  millions,  you  stand  before  the  throne,  and exultingly sing, "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and might, and honor, and glory, and blessing!" — "To him who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb be  blessing,  and  honor,  and  glory  and  strength  forever  and forever!" Amen. 

