***ADDRESS TO BELLIGERENT ALIENS.*** 

To him who, through the telescope of faith, surveys your camp, there  appears  not  on  the  whole  map  of  creation  such  a  motley group,  such  a  heterogeneous  and  wretched  amalgamation  of distracted spirits, as are found in actual insurrection and rebellion, in a mad and accursed alliance against the reigning Monarch of creation. In your lines are found every unclean and hateful spirit on this side the fathomless gulf, the dark and rayless receptacle of fallen  and  ruined  intelligences,  who,  in  endless  and  fruitless wailings, lament their own follies, and through an incessant night of  despair  anathematize  themselves,  and  their  coadjutors  in  the perpetuation of their eternal suicide. Yes, in your ranks are found all who wilfully reject the Son of God, and will not have him to reign over them; whether they are styled the decent moralist, the honest deist, sceptic, atheist, infidel, the speculating Sadducee, the boasting Pharisee, the supercilious Jew, the resentful Samaritan, or the idolatrous Gentile. All ranks and degrees of men in political society — the  king  and  the  beggar — the  sage  philosopher  and  the uneducated clown — the rich and the poor, who disdain the precepts of the Messiah, unite with you in this unholy alliance against the kingdom  of  heaven.  You  may  boast  of  many  a  decent fellow-soldier in the crusade against Immanuel; many who, when weighed in the balances of the political sanctuary, are not found wanting in all the decencies of this present life; but yet look at the innumerable  crowds  of  every  sort  of  wretches,  down  to  the filthiest,  vilest  matricide,  who  in  your  communion  are  fighting under  your  banners — stout-hearted  rebels! — leagued  with  you  in your attempts to dethrone the Lord's Anointed. If you boast of one Marcus Aurelius, you must fraternize with many a Nero, Domitian, Caligula, and Heliogabalus.  If  you rejoice in the virtues of one Seneca, you must own the vices of the ten thousand murderers, robbers,  adulterers,  drunkards,  profane  swearers,  and  lecherous debauchees, who have rejected the counsels of heaven, because the precepts of righteousness and life forbade their crimes. 

If, then, my friends, (for I now address the most honorable of your community,)  you  boast  that  you  belong  to  a  very  large  and respectable synagogue; remember, I pray  you, that to this same synagogue  in  which  you  have  your  brotherhood,  belongs  every thing mean, and vile, and wretched, in every land where the name of Jesus has been announced. *What a group!* Have you so much of the reflex light of the gospel falling upon your vision as to flush your cheek with the glow of shame when you look along the lines of  your alliance, and survey the horrible faces, the ragged, and tattered,  and  squalid,  and  filthy  wretches,  *your  companions  in arms — members  with  you  in  the  synagogue  of  Satan — and confederates against the Prince of Peace!* If you cannot blush at such a spectacle, you are not among them to whom I would tender the pearls of Jesus Christ. 

What do you then say? "I am ashamed of such an alliance — of such a  brotherhood;  and  therefore  I  have  joined  the  Temperance Society — I  belong  to  the  Literary  Club — and  I  carry  my  family regularly  to  church  every  Sunday."  And  do  you  think,  O simpleton!  that  these  human  inventions,  which  only  divide  the kingdom of Satan into castes, and form within it various private communications, honorable and dishonorable associations, learned and unlearned fraternities, moral and immoral conventicles, change the state of a single son of Adam as respects the Son of God!! Then may  Whig  and  Tory,  Masonic  and  Antimasonic  clubs  and conclaves — then may every political cabal, for the sake of elevating some demagogue, change the political relations in the state, and make an unmake American citizens according to fancy, in despite of constitution, law, and established precedents. No, sir;  should there be as many parties in the state, as there are days in a month, membership  in  any  one  of  these  affects  not,  in  the  least,  the standing of any man as a citizen in relation to the United States, or to any foreign power. And by parity of reason, as well as by all that is written in the New Testament, should you join all the benevolent societies on the checkered map of Christendom, and fraternize with every brotherhood born *after the will of man,* this would neither change nor destroy your citizenship in the kingdom of Satan — still you  would  be  an  alien  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah — a foreigner  as  respects  all  its  covenanted  blessings — and,  in  the unbiassed  judgment  of  the  universe,  you  would  stand  enrolled amongst its enemies. 

In *character* there are many degrees, as respects any and every attribute which enters into its formation; but as respects *state,* there are no degrees. In the nature of things it is impossible. Every man is either married or single, a brother, a master, a citizen, or he is not. Every man is either Christ's or Belial's; there is no middle power,  and  therefore  no  neutral  state.  Hence  the  King  himself, when on the present theatre of war, told his companions to regard every man as his enemy who was not on his side. Amongst his professed friends, they who in works deny him, are even counted as enemies.  

What  a  hopeless  struggle  is  that  in  which  you  are  engaged! Discomfiture,  soon  or  late,  awaits  you.  Have  you  counsel  and strength to oppose the Sovereign of the Universe? Do you think you can frustrate the counsels of Infinite Wisdom and overcome Omnipotence? Your master is already a prisoner — your chief is in chains. The fire of eternal vengeance is already kindled for Satan and  all  his  subjects.  Mad  in  his  disappointed  ambition,  and implacable in his hatred of him against whom he rebelled, he only seeks  to  gratify  his  own  malice,  by  involving  with  himself  in irremediable ruin the unhappy victims of his seduction. He only seeks to desolate the dominions of God, and to ruin forever his fellow creatures. Will you, then, serve your worst enemy, and war against your best friend? 

But your rebellion can effect nothing against God. His arm is too strong for the whole creation. You cannot defeat his counsels nor stay his almighty hand. The earth on which you stand trembles at his rebuke; the foundations of the hills and mountains are moved and shaken at his presence. You fight against yourselves. God's detestation of your course arises not from any apprehension that you can  injure him;  but  because  you destroy  yourselves. Every triumph which your inordinate desires and passions gain over the remonstrances of reason and conscience only precipitates you into deeper and deeper misery, matures you for perdition, and makes it essential  to  the  good  order  and  happiness  of  the  universe,  you should suffer an 'everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.' 

What, then, infatuates  you, that you should choose death rather than life, and prefer destruction to salvation? "I am not sure that the  gospel  is  true;  I  love  my  companions,  and  cannot  see  any criminality in  gratifying those passions and appetites which my creator has planted in my constitution." 

You admit there is a God, your Creator; but you doubt whether the gospel is true! What an abuse of reason and evidence! Can you infer from any premises in your possession, that **he**, whose creation man is, who has exhibited to the eye and ear of man so much wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  in  all  his  grand  designs  already accomplished, and daily accomplishing, in the heavens and in the earth, teaching men to  sustain the present life, to anticipate the future, and to provide for it, has never intelligibly addressed him on a subject of incomparably more importance — his own ultimate destiny! That God should have been at so much pains to elevate man in nature — to furnish him with such an organization — to bestow on him reason and speech — admirably qualifying him to acquire and communicate instruction, on all things necessary to his present animal  enjoyments;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  have  never communicated  to  him  anything  relative  to  his  intellectual nature — never to have addressed him on the themes, which, as a rational creature, he must necessarily most of all desire to know; to have  done  every  thing  for  his  body,  and  for  the  present — and nothing for his mind, nor for the future — is, to say the least of it, the most  improbable  conceit  that  the  most  romantic  fancy  can entertain. 

That the Creator *could not* enlighten him on these topics, is wholly inadmissible. That he could, and *would not,* is directly contrary to every analogy in creation — contradictory to every proof we have of his benevolence, an inexplicable exception to the whole order of his  government:  for  he  has  provided  objects  for  every sense — objects  for  every  intellectual  power — objects  for  every affection,  honorable  passion,  appetite  and  propensity,  in  our constitution; but, on your hypothesis, he has only failed in that which is infinitely more dear to us, more consonant to our whole rational nature, and most essential to our happiness!! It is most contrary to reason. 

But the folly of your scepticism is still more glaring when we open the book of the gospel of salvation. In the history of Jesus you have the fulfillment of a thousand predictions, expressed by numerous Prophets  for  1500  years  before  he  was  born.  These  recorded prophecies  were  in  the  possession  of  his  and  our  most  bitter enemies, when he appeared, and are still extant in their hands. How can you dispose of these? All antiquity confirms the existence of Jesus of Nazareth in the times of Augustus and Tiberius Cesar. No contemporary opponent denied his miracles: they explained them away, but questioned not the wonderful works which he wrought. His character was the only perfect and unexceptionable one the world ever saw, either in print, or in real life; and yet you imagine him to have been the greatest liar and most infamous imposter that ever lived. You must admit him to have been the teacher of every thing  moral,  and  pure  and  godlike — to  have  lived  the  most exemplary  life — to  have  employed  his  whole  life  in  doing good — while, to countenance  your scepticism, you must imagine him  to  have  been  the  greatest  deceiver  and  most  blasphemous pretender the world ever saw! Truly, you are fond of paradox! 

His Apostles, too, for the sake of being accounted the offscourings of the world, and the filth of all society — for the sake of poverty, contumely,  stripes,  imprisonment,  and  martyrdom,  you  imagine travelled  over  the  earth  teaching  virtue  and holiness — discountenancing every specifies of vice and immorality, while telling the most impudent lies, and that too about matters of palpable fact, about which no man having eyes and ears could be mistaken! How great your credulity! How weak your faith! 

And  to  consummate  the  whole,  you  admit  that  in  the  most enlightened  age,  and  amongst  the  most  disputatious  and discriminating population, both Jewish, Roman, and Grecian, in Jerusalem itself, the very theatre of the crucifixion of Christ, and in all Judea and Samaria, and in all the great towns and cities of the whole ancient Roman Empire, Eastern and Western, these rude and uncultivated Galileans did actually succeed in persuading hundred of thousands of persons, of all ranks, sexes, ages, and intellects, to renounce  their  former  opinions  and  practices — to  encounter proscription,  confiscation of goods,  banishment, and even death itself in numerous instances, through faith in their testimony, while every thing was fresh, and when the detection of any fiction or fraud was most easy! 

Now, if it were possible to place your folly in an attitude still more inexcusable, I would ask you to show what there is in the gospel, that  is  not  infinitely  worthy  of  God  to  bestow,  and  of  man  to receive? And where under the canopy of the skies, in any country, language,  or  age  of  time,  is  there  anything  that  confers  greater honor on man, or proposes to him anything more worthy of his acceptance, than the gospel? 

Can  there  have  been  a  more  acceptable  model  proposed,  after which  to  fashion  man,  than  that  after  which  he  was  originally created? When he was beguiled and apostatized from God, could there have been deputed a more honorable personage to effect his reconciliation  to  God,  than  his  only  begotten  and  well  beloved Son? And could there even be imagined a more delectable destiny allotted to man, than an immortality of bliss in the palace of this vast universe, in the presence of his Father and his God forever and forever?  Now,  with  all  these  premises,  will  you  object  to  this religion, that it requires a man to be pure and holy, in order to his enjoyment of this eternal salvation? Then lay your hand upon your face, and blush, and be ashamed forever! 

But you say you love you companions! And who are they? Your fellow-rebels, foolish and infatuated like yourselves. The drunkard, the thief, the murderer, love their companions, the partners of their crimes.  Conspirators  and  partizans  in  any  undertaking,  kindred spirits in guilty and daring enterprise, confirm each other in their evil machinations, and either from mutual interest, or from some hateful affinity in evil dispositions, coalesce and league together in bands  of  malicious  depredation.  A  Cataline,  a  Jugurtha,  a Robespierre, had their confederates. The rakes, the libertines, the freebooters of every color, form their own fraternities, and have a liking of some sort for their companions. And wherein does your attachment to your companions differ from theirs? A congeniality of disposition, a similarity of likings and dislikings, all springing from you love of the world, and your dislike of the authority of the Messiah.  And  will  not  a  change  of  circumstances  convert  your affections into hatred? Soon or late, if you do not repent and turn to God, you that are leagued in the friendships of the world, those friendships arising from the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, will not only become enemies, but mutual tormentors  of  one  another.  Your  warmest  friends  in  your opposition to the Son of God will become King's evidence against you, and exasperate the flame that will consume you forever and ever.  Break  off,  then,  every  friendship,  alliance,  and  covenant, which you have formed with them that disdain the grace of God, and  condemn  the  Savior  of  the  world,  and  form  an  everlasting covenant with the people of God, which shall never be forgotten. Then, indeed, you may love your companions with all the affection of  your  hearts,  and  indulge  to  the  utmost  every  sympathy  and social feeling of your nature. Then may you embrace, in all the ardor of fraternal love, those kindred spirits that with you have vowed eternal allegiance to the gracious and rightful Sovereign of all  the  nations  of  the  redeemed,  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  Such companions  are  worth  possessing,  and  their  friendship  worth cultivating and preserving through all the journey of life; for it will be renewed beyond the Jordan, and flourish with increasing delight through the endless ages of eternity. 

But  you have said that the gratification of all the impulses and propensities of your nature must be innocent, because they are the creation of God, and were sown in the embryo of your physical constitution. If under the control of that light and reason, under which  God  commanded  your  affections  and  appetites  to  move, your reasoning would be sound and safe; but if they have usurped a tyranny over your judgment, and captivated your reason, they are not  to  be  gratified.  They  are  like  successful  rebels  that  have dethroned their sovereign; and, because by violence and fraud in possession of the throne, they plead a divine right to wield the sceptre over their dethroned Prince. Such is the meaning of the plea which you urge in favor of your rebellious affections. When man rebelled against his Creator, the beasts of the field, till then under  his  dominion,  rebelled  against  him;  and  all  his  passions, affections, and propensities partook of the general disorder — of that wild  and  licentious  anarchy  which  ensued  upon  man's disobedience. And have you not in your daily observation — nay, have you not in your own experience, irrefragable evidence that the uncontrolled indulgence of even the instinctive appetites, as well  as  the  gratification  of  inordinate  passions  and  affections, necessarily issue in the destruction of the physical constitution of man? Is not the control of reason, is not the exercise of discretion in the licence of every animal indulgence, essential to the health and life of man? Then why crave an exemption from the universal law of human existence, in favor of that demoralizing course of indulgence, which you would fain call innocent in morals, though in physics evidently destructive to animal organization? 

When  reconciled  to  God  through  the  gospel,  the  peace  of  God which passes understanding reigning in the heart, all is order and harmony  within.  Then,  under  the  control  of  enlightened  and sanctified reason, all the passions, appetites, and instincts of our nature, like the planets  round the sun,  move in their respective orbits in the most perfect good order, preserving a perfect balance in all the principles and powers of human action. Pleasures without alloy  are  then  felt  and  enjoyed  from  a  thousand  sources,  from which, in the tumult and disorder of rebellion, every transgressor is debarred.  It  is  then  found,  that  there  is  not  a  supernumerary passion,  affection,  nor  appetite  in  man — not  one  that  adds  not something  to  his  enjoyment — not  one  that  may  not  be  made  an instrument of righteousness, a means of doing good to others, as well as of enjoying good ourselves. Why not, then, lay down the weapons of your rebellion, and be at peace with God, with your fellow-creatures, and with yourselves? 

"Admitting, then, that the gospel is true — that in my present state and standing I am an alien from the kingdom of heaven, and that I wished to become a citizen, where shall I find this kingdom of heaven, and how shall I be constituted a citizen thereof?" Well, indeed, may you admit the gospel to be true, both on account of what  it  is  in  itself,  and  the  evidence  which  sustains  it.  Only suppose it to be false — extinguish all the light which it sheds on the human  race — make  void  all  its  promises — annul  all  its hopes — eradicate from the human breast all the motives which it imparts — and what remains to explain the universe, to develop the moral character of God, to dissipate the gloom which envelopes the eternal night the destiny of man, to solace and cheer him during the incessant struggle of life, to soothe the bed of affliction and death, and to countervail the inward dread and horror of falling into nothing — of being forever lost in the promiscuous wreck of nature — of sinking down into the grave, the food of worms, the prey of an eternal death? 

It  is  like  annihilating  the  sun  in  the  heavens.  An  eternal  night ensures. There is no beauty, form, nor comeliness in creation. The universe is  in  ruins. The world  without the  Bible is  a universe without a sun. The Atheist is but an atom of matter in motion, belonging  to  no  system,  amenable  to  none,  without  a  destiny, without  an  object  to  live  or  to  die.  He  boasts  there  is  none  to punish him: but then there is none to help him — none to reward him. He has no Father, proprietor, or ruler — no filial affection, no sense of obligation, no gratitude, no comfort in reflection, no joy in anticipation. If he cannot be blamed, he cannot be praised — if he cannot be praised, he cannot be honored — and man without honor is more wretched than the beasts that perish. Unenviable mortal! 

What an abortion is the system of nature, if man lives not again! It is a creation for the sake of destruction. It is an infinite series of designs, ending in nothing. It is a universe of blanks, without a single  prize.  It  cannot  be.  The  Bible  is  necessary  to  the interpretation  of  nature.  It  is  the  only  comment  on  nature — on providence — on  man.  Man  without  it,  and  without  the  hope  of immortality, has nothing to rouse him into action. He is a savage, a Hottentot, a cannibal, a worm. You are compelled, then, to admit that the gospel is true, unless you put out the eye of reason, and refuse to hear the voice of Nature. 

But is it not a happy necessity which compels your belief in God, and in his Son the renovator of the Universe? It opens to you all the mysteries of creation, the arcana of the temple of nature, and inducts you to the fountain of being and of bliss. It inspires you with motives of high and lofty enterprise, stimulates you to manly action, and points out a prize worthy of the best efforts of body, soul, and spirit. Is it not, then, 'a credible saying, and worthy of universal acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even the chief?' 

But you ask, 'Where shall the kingdom of heaven be found, and how may  you be  constituted a  citizen of it?' The Prophets  and Apostles  must  be  your  guide  in  deciding  these  great  questions. Moses in the law, all the Prophets, and all the Apostles point you to  the  Lamb  of  God  that  takes  away  the  sin  of  the  world — the Apostle of the Father Almighty — the divinely constituted Chief of the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He  has  submitted  his  claims  to  your examination — he has invited you to test all his pretensions — and to the humble and docile he has tendered all necessary assistance, in deciding upon his person and mission. 

His character is so familiar, so condescending, so full of all grace and goodness, that all may approach him. The halt, the maimed, the deaf, the dumb, the blind, found in him a friend and physician indeed. None importune his aid in vain. His ears are always open to the tale of woe. His eyes streams with sympathy on every object of  distress.  He  invites  all  the  wretched  and  repulses  none  who implore relief. He chides only the proud, and kindly receives and blesses the humble. He invites and beseeches the weary, the heavy laden, the broken hearted, the oppressed, and all the sons of want and misfortune, to come to him, and tenders relief to all. 

In his official dignity he presides over the universe. He is the High Priest of God and the Prophet and Messenger of Peace. He has the key of David; he opens and shuts the Paradise of God. He is the only Potentate, and has the power of granting remission of all sins to all who obey him. 

To  receive  him  in  his  personal  glory  and  official  dignity  and supremacy,  as  the  Messiah  of  God,  the  only  begotten  of  the Father — to know him in his true and proper character, is the only prerequisite to the obedience of faith. He that thus accredits him is not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  To  assume  him  as  your Prophet, your High Priest, and your King; to submit to him in these relations, being immersed into his death, will translate you into the kingdom of heaven. Why not, then, gladly and immediately yield him the admiration of your understanding, and the homage of your heart? Why not now enter into the possession of all the riches, and fulness, and excellence of the kingdom? He commands *all* men to repent — he beseeches every sinner whom he addresses in his word, to receive pardon and eternal life as a gracious gift. 

Can you doubt his power to save, to instruct, and to sanctify you for  heaven?  Can  you  doubt  his  condescending  mercy  and compassion?  Will  not  he  that  pitied  the  blind  Bartimeus,  that condoled with the widow of Nain, that wept with Mary and Martha at the grave of Lazarus, that heard the plea of the Syrophenician woman, that cleansed the supplicating leper, that compassionated the  famishing  multitudes,  that  looked  with  pity  (even  in  the agonies of the cross) upon an importuning thief, have pity upon you, and every returning prodigal, who sues for mercy at the gate of his kingdom? 

Is there in  the universe, one whom  you can believe with  more assurance,  than  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness,  who,  in  the presence  of  Pontius  Pilate,  witnessed  a  good  confession  at  the hazard of his life? Is there any person in heaven, on earth, or under the  earth,  more  worthy  of  your  confidence,  than  the  sinner's friend — than  he  who,  always,  and  in  all  circumstances,  bore testimony to the truth? When did he ever violate his word, or suffer his promise to fail? Who ever repented of his confidence in Jesus, or of relying implicitly upon his word? Who ever was put to shame because of confidence in him? 

Who can offer such inducements to obedience by his authority as the Savior of the world? Who has such power to bless? He has all authority in heaven and on earth. He has power to forgive sins, to raise the dead, to bestow immortality and eternal life, and to judge the living and the dead. And has he not tendered a participation of his official authority to every one who submits to his government, and who, by him, is reconciled to God? If he have wisdom and power divine, has he not pledged these to the relief, guidance, and benefit  of  his  people?  Who  can  injure  them  under  his protection — condemn  whom  he  justifies — criminate  whom  he pardons — or snatch out of his hands, those who betake themselves to his mercy? 

Was  there  ever  love  like  his  love — compassion  like  his compassion — or condescension like his condescension! Who ever could — who  ever  did  humble  himself  like  the  Son  of  God?  On whose cheek ever flowed tears of purer sympathy for human woe, than  those  he  shed?  Whose  bowels  ever  moved  with  such compassion, as that which dissolved his heart in tender mercies for the afflicted sons and daughters of men? Who ever for his friends, endured such contradiction of sinners against himself; submitted to such indignities; sustained such accumulated sorrows and griefs; suffered  such  agonies  of  mind  and  body;  as  those  which  he endured in giving his life an offering for his enemies? Forsaken by his  God,  abandoned  by  his  friends,  deserted  of  every  stay, surrounded  by  the  fiercest  enemies,  the  most  implacable  foes, whose hearts were harder than adamant, insulting the very pangs which they inflicted, he expired on the accursed tree! The heavens blushed  at  the  sight — the  sun  covered  his  face — the  earth trembled — the rocks split — the veil of the temple was rent from top to  bottom — and  graves  opened.  All  nature  stood  horror-stricken, when Roman soldiers, urged by blood-thirsty priests, nailed him to the cross — when the chief priests, scribes, and elders in derision said, 'He saved others: cannot he save himself?' The person who perceives  not,  who  feels  not  the  eloquence  of  his  love consummated  in  his  death — the  tenderness  of  his  entreaties  and expostulations, is not to be reasoned with — is not to be moved by human power. Will you not, then, honor your reason by honoring the Son of God — by giving up your understanding, your wills, your affections, to the teachings of the Good Spirit — to the guidance of his love? Then, and only then, can you feel yourselves safe, secure, and happy. 

Need you to be reminded how much you are indebted to his long suffering patience already — to his benevolence in all the gifts and bounties of his providence vouchsafed to you? How many days and nights has he guarded, sustained, and succoured you? Has he not saved you from ten thousand dangers — from the pestilence that walks  in  darkness  secretly,  and  from  destruction  that  wastes  at noon  day?  Who  can  tell  but  he  has  lengthened  out  your unprofitable existence to this very hour, that you might now repent of all your sins, turn to God with your whole heart, be baptized for the  remission  of  your  past  transgressions,  be  adopted  into  the family of God, and yet receive an inheritance among the sanctified. Arise, then, in the strength of Israel's God — accept salvation at his hands — enter into his kingdom, and be forever blessed. You will not, you cannot repent of such a step, of such a noble surrender of yourself while life endures; in the hour of death, in the day of judgment, nor during the endless succession of ages in eternity. *To-day,* then, hear his voice: to-morrow may be for ever too late! All  things  are  ready —  — Come. —  — Saints  on  earth,  and  angels  in heaven — apostles, prophets, and martyrs will rejoice over you — and you will rejoice with them for ever and for ever. Amen! 

