2. Testimony 

The  Romans,  from  whom  we  have  borrowed  much  of  our language, called the witness the *testis.* The declaration of this *testis* is still called testimony. In reference to the material system around us, to all objects and matters of sense, the eye, the ear, the smell, the  taste,  the  feeling,  are  the  five  witnesses.  What  we  call  the evidence of sense, is, therefore, the testimony of these witnesses, which  constitute  the  five  avenues  to  the  human  mind  from  the kingdom  of  nature.  They  are  figuratively  called  witnesses,  and their  evidence,  testimony.  But  the  report  or  declaration  of intelligent beings, such as God, angels, and men, constitute what is properly and literally called *testimony.* 

As light reflected from any material object upon the eye, brings that object into contact with the eye, or enables the object to make its image on the eye, so testimony concerning any fact, brings that fact into contact with the mind, and enables it to impress itself, or to form its image upon the intellect, or mind of man. Now, be it observed,  that  as  by  our  five  external  senses  we  acquire  all information of the objects of sense around us, so by testimony, human  or  divine,  we  receive  all  our  information  upon  all  facts which are not the objects of immediate exercise of our five senses upon the things around us. 

To  appreciate  the  full  value  of  testimony  in  divine  work  of regeneration, we have only to reflect, that all the moral facts which can form moral character, after the divine model, or which  can effect  a  moral  or  religious  change  in  man,  are  found  in  the testimony of God: and that no fact can operate at all, where it is not present; or where it is not known. The love of God in the death of the Messiah, never drew a tear of gratitude or joy from any eye, or excited a grateful emotion in any heart among the nations of our race to whom the testimony never came. No fact in the history of six thousand years, no work of God in creation, providence, or redemption, has ever influenced the heart of man or woman, to whom it has not been testified. Testimony is, then, in regeneration, as necessary as the facts of which it speaks. 

The real value of anything, is the labor which it cost, and its utility when acquired. If reason and justice arbitrated all questions upon the value of property, the decision would be, that every article is worth the amount of human labor which is necessary to obtain it; and when obtained, it is again to be tried in the scales of utility. Now, as all the facts, and all the truth which can renovate human nature, are in the testimony of God; and as that testimony cost the labor  and  the  lives  of  the  wisest  and  best  that  ever  lived,  that testimony, to us, is just as valuable as the facts which it records, and the labors and the lives which it cost, and just as indispensable in the process of regeneration, as were the labors and the lives of Prophets, Apostles, and the Son of God. 

History, or narrative, whether oral or written, is only another name for testimony. When, then, we reflect how large a portion of both Testaments is occupied in history, we may judge of how much importance it is in the judgment of God. Prophecy, also, being the history of future facts, or a record of things to be done, belongs to the same chapter of facts and record. Now if all past facts, and all future facts, or all the history or testimony concerning them, was erased from the volumes of God's inspiration, how small would the remainder be! These considerations, added together, only in part exhibit the value and utility of testimony in the regeneration of mankind. But its value will be still more evident, when the proper import of the term *faith* is fully set before us. 

