4. Confirmation of the Testimony 

   All revealed religion is based upon facts. Testimony has respect to facts  only;  and  that  testimony  may  be  credible,  it  must  be confirmed. These points are of so much importance as to deserve some  illustration,  and  much  consideration.  By  *facts*  we  always mean something said or done. The works of God and the words of God, or the things done and spoken by God, are those facts which are laid down and exhibited in the Bible as the foundation of all faith,  hope,  love,  piety,  and  humanity.  All  true  and  useful knowledge is an acquaintance with facts. And all true science is acquired from the observation and comparison of facts. But he that made the heart of man and gave him an intelligent spirit. knows that facts alone can move the affections and command the passions of man. Hence the scheme of mercy which he has discovered to the world, is all contained in, and developed by, *the works of mercy* which he has wrought. 

Facts have a meaning which the understanding apprehends, and the heart feels. According to the meaning or nature of the fact, is its effect upon us. If a friend have risked his life, or sacrificed his reputation or fortune to relieve us, we cannot but confide in him and love him. If an enemy have attempted our life, invaded our property, or attacked our reputation, we cannot, naturally, but hate him. Nothing but the command of a benefactor, or the will of some dear  friend,  who  had  laid  us  under  obligation  to  himself,  can prevent  us from hating  our enemies.  If a beloved relative have sustained some great misfortune, we must feel sorry; or if he have been rescued from some impending calamity, we must feel glad. Our joy in the latter case, and our sorrow in the former, arise from the meaning or nature of the fact. The feelings corresponding with the  nature  of  the  fact,  are  excited  or  called  into  existence  the moment the fact is known or believed. It is *known* when we have witnessed it ourselves, and it is *believed* when reported to us by credible persons who have witnessed it. This is the chief difference between faith and knowledge. 

As  existence  or  beings  must  precede  knowledge,  so  facts  must precede either knowledge or belief. An event must happen before it can be known by man — it must be known by some before it can be reported to others — it must be reported before it can be believed, and the testimony must be confirmed, or made credible, before it can be relied on. 

Something  must  be  done  before  it  can  be  known,  reported,  or believed. Hence, in the order of nature, there is first the fact, then the  testimony,  and  then  the  belief.  A  was  drowned  before  B reported it — B reported it before C believed it, and C believed it before he was grieved at it. This is the unchangeable and universal order of things as respects belief. In this example when we reason from effect to cause, it is *grief, belief, testimony, fact* — and from cause to effect, it is *fact, testimony, belief, grief.* We ascend from grief to belief — from belief to testimony — from testimony to fact. We descend from fact to testimony — from testimony to belief — and from  belief  to  grief.  To  this  there  is  no  exception,  more  than against the universality of the law of gravity. If, then, there was nothing said or done, there could be no testimony, and so no faith. Religious  affections  spring  from  faith;  and,  therefore,  it  is  of importance,  that  this  subject  should  be  disintricated  from  the mysticism of the schools. 

Laws call for obedience, and testimony for belief. Where there is no law, there can be no obedience; and when there is no testimony, there can be no faith. As obedience cannot transcend law, so faith cannot  transcend  testimony.  John's  testimony  went  to  so  many facts.  On  his  testimony  we  can  believe  only  as  far  as  he  has testified. And so of all the other witnesses. The certainty of faith depends upon the certainty or credibility of the witnesses. But not so  its  effects.  The  *effects*  depend  upon  the  facts  believed — the *certainty* upon the evidence. I may be equally certain that John was beheaded — that Jesus was crucified. Nay, I may be as certain of the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem, as I am of his death on Calvary. The testimony may be equally credible, and the faith equally strong; but the effects produced are not the same. The facts believed have not  the  same  meaning,  are  not  of  the  same  nature,  and  do  not produce the same feelings or effects. I may be as certain of the assassination  of  Cesar  in  the  Senate  House,  as  I  am  of  the crucifixion of Jesus on Calvary: but as the facts believed are as diverse in their nature, meaning, and bearings upon me, as the East and the West; so the effects or fruits of my faith are as different as Julius Cesar and Jesus Christ. 

The  more  ordinary  the  fact,  the  more  ordinary  the  testimony necessary to establish it. That A B, aged 90, and confined for some time with sickness, died last night, requires only the most ordinary testimony to render it credible. But that C D lived to 140, enjoying unabated vigor of mind and body, requires stronger testimony. But still,  all  facts  happening  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  and natural laws of things, require but good human testimony to make them worthy of credence. It is only extraordinary and supernatural facts  which  require  supernatural  testimony,  or  testimony supernaturally confirmed. This is the point to which we have been looking in this essay. And now that we have arrived at it, I would ask, *How has the testimony of the Apostles and Evangelists been confirmed?* 

To *confirm a testimony* is neither more nor less than to make it credible to those to whom it is tendered; or, to express the same idea in other words, it is to give men power to believe. Now, it will not  require  the  same  amount  of  evidence  to  persuade  an astronomer that the earth's shadow struck the moon last eclipse, as it  would  to  convince  an  Indian;  nor  would  it  require  the  same amount of evidence to convince a chemist that combustion was effected  by  pouring  water  on  a  certain  composition  of  mineral substances,  as  it  would  an  unlettered  swain.  To  make  any testimony credible to any order of beings, regard must therefore be had to the capacity, attainments, and habits of those beings. To confirm the testimony of the Apostles concerning the Messiah's death, resurrection, ascension into heaven, and coronation as the Lord and King of the Universe, imports no more nor no less than that it should be rendered every way credible to such things as we are,  or  that  we  should  be  made  able  to  believe.  A  testimony *confirmed,* and yet *incredible* to those to whom it is tendered, is a contradiction in terms. But why emphasize on the word *confirmed?* Because the holy Apostles have emphasized upon it. It is therefore necessary that we should pay a due regard to the confirmation of the testimony. The testimony is one thing, and the confirmation is another.  It  is  necessary,  in  all  important  occasions  in  human affairs, that the testimony which is received between man and man should  be  confirmed  by  some  sanction.  Hence  an  oath  for confirmation  of  testimony  is  an  end  of  all  strife.  The  highest confirmation  which  men  require  in  all  questions  of  facts,  is  a solemn oath or affirmation that the things affirmed are true. 

But supernatural facts require supernatural confirmations. Hence when the confirmation of the gospel is spoken of in the apostolic writings, it is resolved into the doings or works of the Holy Spirit. '*Demonstrations of the Holy Spirit,* are the confirmatory proofs of the  gospel.  When  Paul  delivered  the  testimony  of  God,  or  the testimony concerning Jesus, to the Corinthians, he says, '*It is was confirmed among them.*' And if we examine into the confirmation of the testimony as Paul explained it, we shall find that he makes the spiritual gifts, or those extraordinary and miraculous powers which the Apostles themselves displayed, and which so many of their converts also possessed, an assurance or confirmation of what he promulged. 

We shall only attend to the light which one of his epistles to the Corinthians throws upon this subject. After thanking his God for the favor bestowed upon the disciples  of Corinth  when he first visited them, he proceeds to specify the special favors bestowed upon the disciples in that renowned city. 'You were enriched (says he, chap. 1: ver. 5.) with every gift by him, even with *all speech* and *all knowledge* when the testimony of Christ was confirmed among  you:  so  that  you  come  behind  in  *no  gift.*'  'There  are diversities of gifts, (says he, chap. 12:) for to one disciple is given *the word of wisdom;* to another, *the word of knowledge;* to another, *faith,* (to be healed;) to another, *the gift of healing;* to another, *the ability  of  working  in  others  the  power  of  working  miracles;*  to another,  *prophecy;*  to  another,  *discerning  of  spirits;*  to  another, *divers kinds of foreign tongues;* and to another, *the interpretation of foreign tongues.*' — Now, the Corinthians were put in possession of these (for they came behind in no gift) 'when the testimony of Christ was confirmed among them.' For, says Paul, I came not to you with the excellency of speech, or the persuasive eloquence of the schools, but with the demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your belief of my testimony, or your faith, might not rest, or be founded upon human wisdom or eloquence, but upon the power of God evinced in the demonstrations of the Spirit which confirmed my  testimony  among  you.  For  had  it  not  been  for  these demonstrations of the Spirit and power, your faith could not have rested upon an immoveable basis. 

To those desirous to understand this subject, an examination of this first letter to the Corinthians cannot fail to be most instructive; for it  most  clearly  and  unequivocally  teaches  us  that  the  *visible, audible, sensible* demonstration of the Spirit and of power, was that supernatural attestation of the testimony of Christ which made it  credible,  so  that  no  man  could  have  acknowledged  Jesus  of Nazareth to be the Almighty Lord, but by this demonstration of the Holy Spirit.  Thus was  the testimony  confirmed — thus  was Jesus demonstrated to be the only begotten Son of God —  and thus, and thus only, are men enabled to believe in him.4 

