6. Purity of Speech 

If  I  were  to  classify  in  *three*  chapters  the  whole  Christian institution, after the fashion of the modern schools, for the sake of being understood, I would designate them Christian *faith,* Christian *worship,* and Christian *morality.* To these the moderns have added two others, which, using the same licence,  I would  call human *philosophy,* and human *traditions.* Now, in the first chapter, we, and all Christians, are agreed: for as Christian faith has respect to *the matters of fact* recorded — to the direct testimony of God found in the New Testament concerning himself — concerning his Son and Spirit — concerning mankind — what he has done, and what he will do, on it there is no debate. I find all *confessions of* **faith**, properly so called, like the *four* gospels, tell the same story so far as matters of fact or faith are concerned. 

In  the  second  chapter  we  are  also  agreed,  that  God  is  to  be worshipped through the Mediator — in prayer, in praise, public and private — in the ordinances of Christian baptism, the Lord's day, the Lord's supper, and in the devotional study of his word and of his works of creation and providence. 

In the third chapter we all acknowledge the same moral code. What is  morality,  is  confessed  and  acknowledged  by  all;  but  in  the practice of it there are great subtractions. 

We repudiate the two remaining chapters as having any place in our  faith,  worship,  or  morality;  because  we  think  we  have discovered that all the divisions in Protestant Christendom — that all the partyism, vain jangling, and heresies which have disgraced the Christian profession, have emanated from human philosophy and human  tradition.  It  is  not  faith,  nor  piety,  nor  morality;  but philosophy  and  tradition  that  have  alienated  and  estranged Christians, and prevented the conversion of the world. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, deserved not the reputation of philosophers, if Calvin, Arminius, and Wesley, were not worthy of it. The former philosophised morally on nature and ancient tradition — the latter, on the Bible, and human society. 

Religious philosophers on the Bible have excogitated the following doctrines and philosophical distinctions: —  

'The Holy Trinity,' 'Three persons of one substance, power, and eternity,' 'Co-essential, co-substantial, co-equal,' 'The Son eternally begotten of the Father,' 'An eternal Son,' 'Humanity and divinity of Christ,' 'The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the  Son,'  'God's  eternal  decrees,'  'Conditional  and  unconditional election and reprobation,' 'God out of Christ,' 'Free will,' 'Liberty and necessity,' 'Original sin,' 'Total depravity,' 'Covenant of grace,'7 'Effectual  calling,'  'Free  grace,'  'Sovereign  grace,'  'General  and particular atonement,' 'Satisfy divine justice,' 'Common and special operations of the Holy Ghost,' 'Imputed righteousness,' 'Inherent righteousness,'  'Progressive sanctification,' 'Justifying and saving faith,' 'Historic and temporary faith,' 'The direct and reflex acts of faith,' 'The faith of assurance, and the assurance of faith,' 'Legal repentance,' 'Evangelical repentance,' 'Perseverance of the saints,'8 and  'Falling  from  grace,'9  'Visible  and  invisible  church,'  'Infant membership,' 'Sacraments,' 'Eucharist,' 'Consubstantiation,' 'Church government,' 'The power of the keys,' etc. etc. 

Concerning these and all such doctrines, and all the speculations and  phraseology  to  which  they  have  given  rise,  we  have  the privilege neither to affirm nor deny — neither to believe nor doubt; because God has not proposed them to us in his word, and there is no  command  to  believe  them.  If  they  are  deduced  from  the Scriptures, we have them in the facts and declarations of God's Spirit; if they are not deduced from the Bible, we are free from all the difficulties and strifes which they have engendered and created. 

*We choose to speak of Bible things by Bible words,* because we are always suspicious that if the word is not in the Bible, the idea which  it  represents  is  not  there;  and  always  confident  that  the things taught by God are better taught in the words, and under the names which the Holy Spirit has chosen and appropriated, than in the words which man's wisdom teaches. 

There is nothing more essential to the union of the disciples of Christ  than  *purity*  of  speech.  So  long  as  the  earth  was  of  one speech, the human family was united. Had they been then of a pure speech  as  well  as  of  one  speech,  they  would  not  have  been separated. God, in his just indignation, dispersed them; and before he scattered them, *he divided their language.* One of his Prophets, who  lived  in  a  degenerate  age,  who  prophesied  against  the corruptions of his day, when he spoke of better times, of an age of union and communion, was commanded to say in the name of the Lord, 'Then will I turn to the people a *pure language,* that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him *with one consent.*'10 Purity of speech is here declared to be prerequisite to serving the Lord with one consent. 

'The words of the Lord are pure words.'11 To have a pure speech we  must  choose  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  abandon  that  of Ashdod. And if we would be of one mind, we must 'speak the same thing.' This was Paul's scheme of union, and no man can suggest a better. 

It requires but little reflection to discover that the fiercest disputes about religion, are about what the Bible does *not* say, rather than about what it *does* say — about words and phrases coined in the mint of  speculative  theology.  Of  these  the  *homousios*  and  the *homoousios*  of  the  ever-memorable  Council  of  Nice  are  a  fair sample. Men are neither wiser, more intelligent, nor better after, than  before,  they  know  the  meaning  of  these  words.  As  far  as known on earth, there is not, in 'the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,' the name of any person who was either converted or sanctified to God by any of these controversies about human dogmas, nor by anything learned from the canons or creeds of all the Councils, from that of Nice to the last Methodistic Conference. 

It is a virtue, then, to forget this scholastic jargon, and even the names of the dogmas which have convulsed Christendom. It is a concession due to the crisis in which we live, for the sake of peace, to adopt the vocabulary of Heaven, and to return the borrowed nomenclature of the schools of its rightful owners — to speculate no more upon the opinions  of Saint Austin, Saint  Tertullian, Saint Origen — to  speak  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy Spirit — of  the  gospel,  of  faith,  of  repentance,  of  baptism,  of election, of the death of Christ, of his mediation, of his blood, of the reconciliation, of the Lord's supper, of the atonement, of the church of God, etc. etc. in all the phrases found in the Record, without partiality — to learn to love one another as much when we differ in opinion as when we agree, and to distinguish between the testimony of God, and man's reasonings and philosophy upon it.  

I need not say much upon the chapter of *human traditions.* They are easily distinguished from the *Apostles' traditions.* Those of the Apostles are found in their writings, as those of men are found in their  own  books.  Some  human  traditions  may  have  a  show  of wisdom, but only an appearance. So long as it is written, 'In vain to they  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of men,'  so  long  will  it  be  presumptuous  folly  to  add  the commandments of men to the precepts of Jesus Christ. I know of but one way in which all believers in Jesus Christ, honorably to themselves, honorably to the Lord, and advantageously to all the sons of Adam, can form one communion. All have two chapters too many in their present ecclesiastic constitutions. The contents of the aforesaid two chapters are various and different in all the sects, but they all have these two chapters under some name. In some they are long, and in some they are short; but whether long or short, let every one agree to tear them out of his book and burn them, and be satisfied with *faith, piety,* and *morality.* Let human philosophy  and  human  tradition,  as  any  part  of  the  Christian institution, be thrown overboard into the sea, and then the ship of the church will make a prosperous, safe, and happy voyage across the  ocean  of  time,  and  finally,  under  the  triumphant  flag  of Immanuel, gain a safe anchorage in the haven of eternal rest. 

I would appeal to every honorable, good, and loyal citizen of the kingdom of Heaven, — to every one that seeks the good of Zion, that loves the kingdom and the appearing of our common Lord and Savior, whether such a concession be not due to the Lord, to the saints in heaven and on earth, and to the whole human race in the crisis in which we are now placed; and whether we could propose less,  or  ought  to  demand  more,  than  to  make  one  whole  burnt offering of all our "empty and deceitful philosophy," — our "science, falsely so called," — and our traditions received from our fathers. I would  leave  it  to  the  good  sense  of  every  sane  mind  to  say, whether  such  a  whole  burnt  offering  would  not  be  the  most acceptable  peace  offering,  which,  in  this  our  day,  could  be presented on the altar of the Prince of Peace; and whether, under the  teachings  of  the  Apostles  of  the  Great  Prophet,  the  church might not again triumphantly stand upon the holy ground, which she so honorably occupied before Origen, Austin, Athanasius, or the first Pope was born!12

1 Christian Baptist, vol. 2, pp. 66, 67. Essays on the Westminster creed, vol. 2. Review of Dr. Noel's Circular, vol. 5.  

2 Pollock's Course of Time, Book 8: p. 189.  

3 Millennial Harbinger —  Extra, No. 6, pp. 340-345.  

4 Millennial Harbinger, vol. 1, pp. 8-12.  

5 The fundamental proposition is — *that Jesus is the Christ.* The *fact,* however, contained in this proposition is — that God has anointed Jesus of Nazareth as the only Savior of sinners. He is the promised Christ: ' God has constituted him Lord and Christ.' —  PETER.  

6 Christian Baptist, vol. 1, pp. 167-169.  

7, 8, 9 These are examples of scriptural phrases misapplied: for the corruption of Christianity has been consummated by the incursions of barbarian language, and by the new appropriations of the sacred style.  

10 Zep 3:9.  

11 Psalm 12:6.  

12 Millennial Harbinger, vol. 6, pp. 109-113.  

