# 4. The Son of God

“The holy progeny (or thing) which shall be born of thee shall be called *the Son of God.*" "Unto us a child is born; unto us a son is given,  and  the  government  shall  be  upon  his  shoulder,  and  his name shall be called Wonderful, Counsellor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting  Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace."  "This  is  my  Son,  the beloved, in whom I delight." "This is my Son, the beloved, hear him." "No person has ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven, even the Son of man, who is in heaven," or whose abode is in heaven. "God so loved the world that he gave his *only begotten Son;* the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." "No man has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son who is the bosom of the Father has declared him." "Rabbi, thou art the Son of God, thou art the king of Israel." "Glorify thou me with thine ownself, with  the glory which  I had with thee before the world was." "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead1 bodily," or substantially. "He is  the first  and the last." "All things were created by him and for him." "In the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and the word was God. All things were made by him, and without him was not anything made that was made." "The word was made flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory: the glory as of an only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth." 

So speak the Divine oracles of the supreme Deity and excellency of the author and perfecter of the Christian system. "By him and for him" all things were created and made; and "he is before all things,  and  by  him  all  things  consist."  But  "he  became  flesh." Who?  He  that  existed  before  the  universe,  whose  mysterious, sublime, and glorious designation was the **word** of God. Before the Christian system, before the  *relation* of "Father, Son, and Holy Spirit" began to be, his rank in the divine nature was that of the **word of god**. Wonderful name! Intimate and dear relation! The relation between a word and the idea which it represents is the nearest  of  all  relations  in  the  universe:  for  the  idea  is  in  the word — and the word is in the idea. The idea is invisible, inaudible, unintelligible, but in and by the word. An idea cannot be without an image or a word to represent it — and therefore God was never without his word, nor was his word without him. "The word was with  God,  and  the  Word  was  God" — for  a  word  is  the  idea *expressed* — and thus "the word that was made flesh," became "the brightness of his  glory" and "the  *express image* of his person," insomuch that "he who has seen the Son has seen the Father also." 

While, then, the phrase "Son of God" denotes a temporal relation, the  phrase  "the  word  of  God"  denotes  an  eternal,  unoriginated relation. There was a *word of God* from eternity, but the Son of God began to be in the days of Augustus Cesar. "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee." He was by his resurrection from the dead declared to be the Son of God with a power and evidence extraordinary  and  divine.  The  **word**  incarnate  or  dwelling  in human flesh, is the person called our Lord and Redeemer, Jesus Christ — and while, in the system of grace, the Father is the  *one God,* in all the supremacy of his glory — Jesus is the *one Lord* in all the divine fulness of sovereign, supreme, and universal authority. The Lord of Shem, of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, is the God and the Lord of Christians: for "the child" that has been born to us — and "the son" that has been given, according to another prophet, came from  eternity.  "His  goings  forth  have  been  from  of  old,  from everlasting."2 Such is the evangelical history of the author of the Christian system as to  his antecedent nature and relation in the Deity or Godhead. 

He became a true and proper **Son of** **Man**." "A body hast thou prepared me." But the "me" was before "the body." It dwelt forever "in the bosom of the Father." "I came forth from God," said "the Incarnate  Word."  Great  beyond  expression  and  "without controversy, great is the mystery — the secret of godliness." "God was  manifest  in  the  flesh."  "He  that  has  seen  me  has  seen  the Father  also."  The  Son  of  Man  was  and  is  the  Son  of God — "Emmanuel, God with us." Adored be his name! The one God  in  the  person  of  the  Father,  has  commanded  all  men  to worship and honor the one Lord, as they would honor him that sent him: for now in glorifying the Son, we glorify the Father that sent him and that dwells in him. "Know yet not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me." Thus spake our Lord Jesus Christ. 

<sub>1: The Apostle here used the word *Theotees.* Col. 2:9, which is but once found in the New Testament. We have, indeed, *Theiotees,* Rom.  1:20,  from  the  same  Apostle,  also  found  but  once, translated  "*Godhead.*"  We  have  also  *Theios,  Theion,*  three times; once Acts 17:29, translated divinity, and by Peter, (2 Pe 1:3-4),  twice,  once  in  connection  with  *power*  and  once  with *nature.* "His divine power" — "a divine nature." "The fulness of the Deity," or Godhead, indicates all divine excellency — all the perfections of God. The term *Deity* imports the divine nature, state, or being of God. "The *fulness*" of that divine nature is here contrasted with an *empty* and deceitful philosophy, (verse 8,) and the term *bodily* superadded, shows that God is in Christ not  as  he  was  in  the  tabernacle  or  temple,  typically,  but substantially, literally, and truly.</sub>

<sub>
2: Mic 5:2.
</sub>
