# 5. The Spirit of God

As there is man and the spirit of man, so there is God and the spirit of  God.  They  are  capable  of  a  separate  and  distinct  existence. "What man knoweth the things of a man," says Paul, "but the spirit of man that is in him; even so the things of God knoweth no man but the Spirit of God." There is in this case an image of God in man — not, indeed, an exact image, but an image; for as Paul says of the  law,  so  say  we  of  man;  "For  the  law  had  a  shadow,  (a resemblance) of good things to come, and not the very (or exact) image of the things." So man was made an image of God, though not the exact image — the active power of man is in his spirit: so John the Baptist came in the *power* of Elijah, because he came in his *spirit.* The spirit of God is therefore often used for his power; though  it  is  not  an  impersonal  power,  but  a  living,  energizing, active,  personal  existence.  Hence,  in  all  the  works  of  God,  the spirit  of  God  is  the  active,  operating  agent.  Thus  in  the  old creation, while ancient chaos yet remained — when "the earth was without form, and void, and darkness brooded on the bosom of the vast  abyss,"  "the  spirit  of  God  moved" — (incubated  and energized) — "upon the face of the waters." "The hand of the Lord has made me, and the spirit of the Almighty has given me life." "The  Holy  Spirit  shall  come  upon  thee,  and  the  *power*  of  the Highest shall overshadow thee;" and thus was chaos subdued, man vitalized, "the heavens garnished," and the body of Jesus made by the spirit of God. 

The Spirit is said to do, and to have done all that God does and all that God has done. It has ascribed to it all divine perfections and works; and in the New Testament it is designated as the immediate author  and  agent  of  the  new  creation,  and  of  the  holiness  of Christians. It is therefore called *the Holy Spirit.* In the sublime and ineffable relation of the Deity, or godhead, it stands next to the Incarnate Word. Anciently, or before time, it *was* **God**, the **Word** of God, and the **Spirit** of God. But now, in the development of the Christian  scheme,  *it  is*  "the  Father,  the  Son,  and  the  Holy Spirit" — one God, one Lord, one Spirit. To us Christians there *is,* then, but one God, even the Father; and one Lord Jesus Christ, even the Savior; and one Spirit, even the Advocate, the Sanctifier, and the Comforter of Christ's body, the church. Jesus is the *head,* and the Spirit is the *life* and animating principle of that body. 

The whole systems of creation, providence, and redemption, are founded upon these relations in the Deity. Destroy these, blend and confound these, and nature, providence, and grace, are blended, confounded, and destroyed. The peerless and supreme excellency of  the  Christian  system  is,  that  it  fully  opens  to  the  vision  of mortals the Divinity — the whole Godhead employed in the work of man's regeneration and ultimate glorification. God is manifest in human  flesh,  and  is  justified  and  glorified  by  the  Spirit,  in accomplishing  man's  deliverance  from  ruin.  Each  name  of  the sacred three has its own peculiar work and glory in the three great works of Creation, Government, and Redemption. Hence, we are by divine authority, "immersed into the name of the **Father**, the **Son**, and the **Holy** **Spirit**," in coming into the kingdom of grace; and while in that kingdom the supreme benediction is — "The *Grace* of  the  **Lord**  **Jesus**  **Christ**,  and  the  *love*  of  **God**,  and  the *communion* of the **Holy** **Spirit** be with you!" Indeed in the old church  that  was  in  the  wilderness,  while  matters  were comparatively in the shadows of a moonlight age, the high priest of Israel was commanded to put "the *name* of God" upon the children of Israel — in the same relation of the scared three. "The Lord [1] bless thee and keep thee. The Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be *gracious* unto thee. The Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace." [2] Jehovah bless thee — is equal to "the love of God." Jehovah be *gracious* unto thee, answers to "the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ" — and Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee and give thee peace, corresponds to "the communion of the Spirit." 

The divine doctrine of these holy and incomprehensible relations in the Divinity, is so inwrought and incorporated with all the parts of  the  sacred  books — so  identified  with  all  the  dispensations  of religion, and so essential to the mediatorship of Christ, that it is impossible  to  make  any  real  and  divine  proficiency  in  the  true knowledge  of  God — of  man — of  reconciliation — or  remission  of sins — of  eternal  life — or  in  the  piety  and  divine  life  of  Christ's religion — without a clear and distinct perception of it, as well as a firm and unshaken faith and confidence in it, as we trust still to make more evident in the sequel. 


<sub>1: In the Hebrew Bible it is Jehovah each time.</sub>

<sub>2: Num 6:24-27.</sub>
