13: The Lordship of the Messiah 

We are seeking to apprehend *the things done for us* in the Christian system. "Christ, our passover, has been sacrificed for us." As such, "not a bone was broken." Yet, "he died for us." In the second place, he has become our *prophet,* as well as our *priest;* and has declared to us the will of God; the whole will of God concerning us. He is our *light,* as well as our *sin offering.* But in the third place, he has been made *Lord* for us. To make Christ Lord *for* us, as well as *of* us — was the last act of the sublime drama of man's redemption from sin.  The  last  secret  of  the  mystery  of  Christ,  which  Peter promulged  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  was,  "Let  all  the  house  of Israel  know,  that  God  has  made  that  same  Jesus,  whom  you crucified, both **Lord** and **Christ**." To make him Lord for us, was to invest him with *universal authority,* that he might have it in his power to give eternal life to all his people. Jesus, in one of his prayers, in anticipation of his investiture, says, "Thou hast given him *power over all flesh* that he might give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him." But after his resurrection from the dead, and ascension into heaven, he was crowned Lord of angels, as well as Lord of men; and therefore he said, "all authority," or lordship, "in heaven and on earth is given to me." He is now the **Lord of hosts**:  legions  of  angels,  the  armies  of  the  skies,  are  given  to him: — for what? That he might be able to do all for us that our condition  needs.  It  was  *for  us*  he  became  a  Prophet,  *for  us*  he became a priest, *for us* he has been made Lord of hosts, King of the universe, Judge and avenger of all. He is Lord of life, Lord of the Spirit, Lord of all. 

We  need  sacrifice — and  therefore  we  need  a  priest.  We  need  a Leader, a Luminary, a Sun of Righteousness; and we want one who can always help us in time of need, when we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with the rulers of the darkness of this world; with wicked spirits living in the air. In Jesus himself, in one of the conflicts, needed an angel to minister to him, we need it more. Three things are done for us; a sin offering is presented; a lamp of life is put into our hands; and all the active powers and energies in the  wide  universe  are  placed  at  the  command  of  our  King whenever we need them. These are things already done. Hence, the Holy Spirit, and all the angels of heaven are now at the disposal of our Savior: for in him all the promises of God are laid up; all the treasures  of  wisdom  and  knowledge,  and  all  the  fulness  of  the Deity, reside fully and truly in him. All these things, it is true, might  be  comprehended  in  one  gift — the  gift  of  Jesus  as  our Mediator; our Prophet,  Priest,  and King. Still it  is  expedient to view  the  things  done  for  us,  severally  and  distinctly  in  the Christian system.  

Other things are promised  *to  be done*  for us:  but  these are the things already done for us, and before we shall speak of the things yet to be done for us, and done in us, we shall summarily consider the things to be done by us, before anything more can be done for us, or done in us. 

