16. Baptism 

There are three things to be considered in baptism: — 1. The action commanded to be done; — 2. The subject specified; — 3. The meaning or design of that action. Jesus commanded a certain *character* to be the subject of a certain *action,* for a certain specific purpose or *design.*  The  questions,  then,  are,  What  that  action?  What  that subject? What that design? 

***Of The Action of Baptism*** 

The  action  is  indicated  by  a  word  as  definite,  clear,  and unequivocal,  as  any  word  in  any  language  ever  spoken  by  the many-tongued sons of Adam. Besides, in all laws and institutions, and more especially in those that are of a *positive,* rather than a *moral*  nature,  all  words  having  both  a  literal  and  a  figurative meaning,  a  common  and  a  special  signification,  are  to  be understood in their literal and common, and not in their figurative and  uncommon  import  and  acception.  So  have  decided  all  the judges of law and language, from time immemorial. 

That definite and unambiguous word, as almost universally known in these days of controversy, is *baptisma,* or *baptismos,* anglicised, not translated, *baptism.* The primary means by which the meaning of  this  word  is  ascertained  are  the  following:  1.  The  ancient lexicons and dictionaries; — 2. The ancient and modern translations of the New Testament; — 3. The ancient customs of the church; — 4. The  place  and  circumstances  of  baptizing,  as  mentioned  in  the New Testament; — and 5. The allusions to this ordinance and the expositions of it in the apostolic epistles. To each of these we shall do little more than simply advert on the present occasion. 

1. **The ancient lexicons with one consent give *immersion* as the natural, common, and primary sense of this word**. There is not known to us a single exception. Nor is there a received lexicon, ancient or modern, that does ever translate this word by the terms *sprinkling* or *pouring.* And as there are but three *actions* allowed to be Christian baptism; and as the original words, both verbs and nouns are translated *immerse* and *immersion,* in all lexicons, and never *sprinkle* or *pour;* follows it not then, that neither sprinkling, nor  pouring  is  Christian  baptism?  The  question  is  not,  whether these words are ever, like other words, used figuratively: whether they may not *metonymically* mean, *wetting* or *washing;* for these may be the effects of either sprinkling, pouring, or dipping. The question  is  not,  whether  these  words  may  be  so  used:  but  the question  is,  whether  the  action  commanded  in  *baptizo,*  be sprinkling, pouring, or immersing a person. All authorized Greek dictionaries,  ancient  and  modern,  with  one  consent,  affirm  that action to be immersion; and not sprinkling or pouring. 
2. **All Latin, English, German and French versions which we have seen, and we believe on the testimony of others, all that we  have  not  seen,  sometimes  translate  these  words,  their derivatives, or compounds, by words equivalent to *immersion:* but  on  *no  occasion*  ever  translate  them  by  sprinkling,  or pouring, or any other word equivalent to these terms**. This is an evidence  of  great  moment:  for  if  these  versions,  have  nineteen times in twenty been made by those who practice sprinkling or pouring in the name of the Lord; and if these words occur about one hundred and twenty times in the New Testament, is it not very singular that never once have such translators rendered the words by sprinkling, or pouring? a decisive proof in our judgment that it could not be so translated. Indeed, a mere English scholar, who has only heard that *baptism* is a Greek word, may indubitably ascertain that it means neither sprinkling nor pouring, by substituting the definition of the term, and trying its sense in all places where the ordinance is spoken of. This is an infallible canon of interpretation. *The proper definition of a term substituted for it will always make as good sense as the term itself.* Now, if an English reader will try *sprinkling*  or  *pouring*  in  those  places  where  he  finds  the  word *baptism,*  he  will  soon  discover  that  neither  of  these  words  can possibly represent it, if the above canon be true. For instance, we are told, that all Judea and Jerusalem went out to John and were *baptized*  of  him  in  the  Jordan.  Sprinkled  them  *in*  the  Jordan! poured them *in* the Jordan! immersed them in the Jordan. Can any doubt,  which  of  these  truly  represents  the  original  in  such passages?  I  may  sprinkle  or  pour  water  upon  a  person;  but  to sprinkle or pour them into water is impossible. It is not said he baptized water upon them, but he baptized them in water, in the river. 
3. **The ancient church, it is admitted on all hands, practiced immersion.** It did so, Roman, Greek and English historians being worthy of any credit. 
3. **The places where baptism was anciently administered, being rivers, pools, baths, and places of much water, show that it was not sprinkling or pouring**. They went down *into* the water, and came up *out* of it, etc. And John baptized where there were many waters or much water. And even Paul and Silas went out of the Philippian jail to baptize the jailor at night, rather than send for a cup of water! 
3. **It  is  also  alluded  to  and  explained  under  the  figure  of  a burial and resurrection, as relating to the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus, etc**. Rom. 6 and Col. 2. 

   From these topics many clear and conclusive arguments may be drawn, on which it is not now our business to dwell. If, indeed, any one of these five topics be correct, the action that Christ commands is  forever  decided.  How  much  more,  when  they  all  concur  in asserting the same interpretation! There is, then, but one baptism, and not two under the Christian administration. 

***The Subject of Baptism*** 

*Characters,*  not  *persons,*  as  such,  are  the  subjects  of  baptism. *Penitent believers* — not infants nor adults, not males nor females, not Jews nor Greeks; but professors of repentance towards God, and faith in Jesus Christ are the proper subjects of this ordinance. "To  as  many  as  received  him,  to  them  he  granted  privilege  of becoming the sons  of God, to  them that believed on his name, which were born not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, but of God." "He that believeth, and is baptized — not he that is baptized and believeth, shall be saved." "Many of the Corinthians hearing, believed and were baptized," not many of the Corinthians were baptized and then believed, and finally heard the Gospel! "for without faith it is impossible to please God," etc. 

***The Meaning of Baptism*** 

"In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, the baptism of repentance, for the remission of sins." "And Jesus said that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem." Therefore, Peter said to the penitent Pentecostians, "Repent, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins." Again, "As many of you as have been baptized or immersed into Christ, have put on Christ, have been immersed into his death;" "have risen with him." 

Baptism is, then, designed to introduce the subjects of it into the participation  of  the  blessings  of  the  death  and  resurrection  of Christ;  who  "died  for  our  sins,"  and  "rose  again  for  our justification."  But  it  has  no  abstract  efficacy.  Without  previous faith in the blood of Christ, and deep and unfeigned repentance before God, neither immersion in water nor any other action can secure  to  us  the  blessings  of  peace  and  pardon.  It  can  merit nothing. Still to the believing penitent it is the *means* of receiving a formal,  distinct,  and  specific  absolution,  or  release  from  guilt. Therefore, none but those who have first believed the testimony of God  and  have  repented  of  their  sins,  and  that  have  been intelligently immersed into  his  death,  have the full and explicit testimony of God, assuring them of pardon. To such only as are truly penitent, dare we say, 'Arise and be baptized, and wash away your sins, calling upon the name of the Lord;' and to such only can we say with assurance, "You are washed, you are justified, you are sanctified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of God." But  let  the  reader  examine  with  care  our  special  essay  on  the Remission of Sins, in which this much debated subject is discussed at considerable length. 

