19. Christians are Persons Pardoned, Justified, Sanctified, Adopted, and Saved. 

    While  adjusting  the  most  important  terms  and  phrases  in  the Christian  system,  in  order  to  a  more  perspicuous  and comprehensive intelligence of it, it is expedient that we should also advert to other predicates of the genuine Christian. The five terms at the head of this chapter are all indicative of his *state;* and do not include any attributes of his *character.* 

These predicates are but  so  many counterpart aspects  of a new state in reference to an old one; or they represent the gospel as affecting the position of man in the universe in all those points in which sin affected him. Was he guilty, condemned, unholy, alien, and lost, in Adam the first? When in Adam the second, he is just in an opposite state; — he is pardoned wherein he was guilty — justified wherein  he  was  condemned — sanctified  wherein  he  was unholy — adopted wherein he was alien — and saved wherein he was lost.  Sin,  then,  condemns,  pollutes,  alienates,  and  destroys  its subjects. Grace justifies, sanctifies, adopts, and saves its subjects in reference to these points. Pardon has respect to guilt; justification, to  condemnation;  sanctification,  to  pollution;  adoption,  to alienation; and salvation, to destruction. Those *out of Christ,* are then, in their sins, condemned, unholy, alien, and lost; while those *in Christ* are pardoned, justified, sanctified, adopted into the family of God, and saved. 

In  former  dispensations,  and  in  the  present,  two  things  are immutable as respects the preparation for a change of state, while the  act  by  which  that  change  is  formally  consummated  is  not necessarily immutable. Thus, in reference to actual transgression, faith  and  repentance,  in  all  dispensations  of  religion,  were necessary  to  forgiveness,  justification,  sanctification,  adoption, salvation.  In  one  word,  God  cannot  forgive  an  impenitent  and unbelieving  transgressor.  But  whether  this  or  that  act  shall consummate a change of state, as respects man's relations to the moral  universe;  whether  that  act  shall  be  circumcision,  animal sacrifice,  baptism,  confession,  prayer,  etc.  is  not  from  any necessity, either in the divine or human nature, immutable. It has been changed; but faith in God's appointments, and repentance for past transgressions, are now, always were, and ever more shall be, necessary to forgiveness. 

The  philosophy  or  reason  of  this  is,  that  faith  and  repentance change  the  state  of  man's  heart  to  God;  and  if  there  was  no universe beyond God and the sinner, all farther acts respecting it would be uncalled for. But as respects the condition of sinners in the universe, and their views, affections, relations, and manner of life, more than faith and repentance, or a change of views  and feelings, is necessary to actual, and sensible, and formal pardon, justification, sanctification, adoption, and the salvation of the soul from  sin.  Hence  came  the  ordinances  of  baptism,  confession, prayer, fasting, and intercession. 

It is wise and kind on the part of Heaven to ordain such acts, or to institute such ordinances as will assure ourselves and others of our new relations; and to suspend our *enjoyment* of the favor and love of God, not merely upon faith and penitence, or any other mental operation;  but  upon  certain  clear,  overt  acts,  such  as  baptism, confession, prayer, etc. which affect ourselves and others, much more than they possibly can affect God himself; being the fruit of our faith, or perhaps, rather, only the perfecting of our faith in the promises of God.  

