# 21. The Christian Hope

"Beloved, now are we the sons of God; and it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like him — that we shall see him as he is. And every one that has this hope in him, purifies himself even as he is pure." "God has predestinated us to be conformed to the image off his Son." "I reckon  that  the  sufferings  of  this  life  are  not  worthy  to  be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us." "He hath begotten us again to a lively hope; to an inheritance incorruptible, undefiled,  and  that  fadeth  not  away."  So  testify  three Apostles — John, Paul, and Peter. The whole hope of the Christian may, indeed, be summed up in one sentence;  "If children, then *heirs — heirs of God,* **joint heirs with christ**." Immortality, eternal life, the riches  of Christ, the glory, honor,  wealth, and bliss  of God's only begotten Son are to be equally participated with all his saints. 

The remedial system is, therefore, a moral creation in progress — a new  creation  of  men  unto  good  works,  still  advancing;  but  its termination will be the stereotyping of individual moral excellence by  an  instantaneous  physical  new  creation  of  men  at  the resurrection of the just: or a manifestation of the sons of God in full  redemption  from  the  whole  entail  of  sin;  raised,  refined, immortalized glorified, and invested with eternal life. 

Hope differs from faith, in  that it looks only  forward to future objects.  It  looks  not  back,  nor  does  it  contemplate  the  present: "for," says Paul, "what a man sees, why does he yet hope for?" Nor looks it on all the future; but only on future *good.* It desires and expects good and nothing else. There is not one dark cloud, not one dark speck, in all the heavens of Christian hope. Every thing seen in its wide dominions, in the unbounded prospect yet before us, is bright,  cheering,  animating,  transporting.  It  is  all  desirable  and desired.  It  is  all  expected.  It  is  all  "earnest  expectation;"  not  a doubtful, but a "confident expectation of things" desirable, and to be "hoped for." 

It is not what some in this age call "the hope," i.e. the desirable expectancy  of  pardon  of  their  past  transgressions:  for  none  but those who are actually pardoned are the subjects of this hope. "If our heart condemn us, then indeed, we have no confidence;" so no confident expectation, no hope of eternal life. The mere possibility of  an  event  is  no  foundation  of  hope.  Hope  deals  not  in possibilities, nor indeed much in probabilities — unless they are very strong  probabilities.  Conjectures,  peradventures,  possibilities, probabilities, are not of the essence of Christian hope. It rests on covenants,  charters,  promises,  oaths,  tendered  by  the  Eternal Source of almighty truth and love. These are good securities; and produce assurance. Hence, hope is the assurance of future good in expectation.  

There are, indeed, various degrees of hope; but in the least degree of it there is desire combined with expectation. Things expected are  not  always  desirable,  nor  are  things  desirable  always  to  be expected: but hope embraces promises that are desirable, and also expects the enjoyment of them. Hence, hope, like faith and love, may grow exceedingly. When based on the promises of God, and on an habitual patient conformity to his will, it will keep pace with our growing intelligence of the character of God; of the fulness and richness  of  the  promises,  and  in  the  persuasion  of  our  actual devotion to the manifestations of that will. 

But *the things hoped for* by the Christian are beyond description. Eye, indeed, has not seen, ear has not heard, the human heart has not conceived the glories of the resurrection of the just; — the new bodies, the new heavens, the new earth, the new Jerusalem, the new society, the new pleasures: for according to his promise we look for (expect) new heavens and new earth in which righteous persons alone shall dwell. Thus terminates the remedial system on all its happy subjects. "It lifts the beggar from the dust, and the wretched from the dunghill, and sets them among princes, amongst the nobles of the universe;" the thrones, hierarchies, and lordships of the skies; in the presence of God, too, "where there is fulness of joy, and at his right hand, where there are pleasures forever more." Such are the things to be done for those, for whom such things have already been done as constitute the remedial system: for with Paul we must say: "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up to the death for us all; how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" "All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours; and you are Christ's, and Christ is God's."
