# 24. The Body of Christ

That institution which separate from the world, and consociates the people of God into a peculiar community; having laws, ordinances, manners, and customs of its own, immediately derived from the Savior of the world, is called the *congregation* or *church* of the Lord. This is sometimes technically called the *mystical* body of Christ, contradistinguished from his literal and natural body. Over this spiritual body he is the Head, the King, Lord, and Lawgiver, and  they  are  severally  members  of  his  body,  and  under  his direction and government.

The *true* Christian church, or house of God, is composed of all those  in  every  place  that  do  publicly  acknowledge  Jesus  of Nazareth as the true Messiah, and the only Savior of men; and, building  themselves  upon  the  foundation  of  the  Apostles  and Prophets,  associate under the constitution which he himself has granted and authorized in the New Testament, and are walking in his ordinances and commandments — and of none else.

This  institution,  called  *the  congregation  of  God,*  is  a  great community  of  communities — not  a  community  representative  of communities;  but  a  community  composed  of  many  particular communities; each of which is built upon the same foundation, walks according to the same rules, enjoys the same charter, and is under the jurisdiction of no other community of Christians; but is to all other communities as an individual disciple is to every other individual disciple in any one particular community meeting in any given place.

Still,  all  these  particular  congregations  of  the  Lord,  whether  at Rome,  Corinth,  or  Ephesus,  though  equally  independent  of  one another, as to the management of their own peculiar affairs; are, by virtue  of  one  common  Lord,  one  faith,  one  baptism,  and  one common salvation, but one kingdom or church of God; and, as such, are under obligations to co-operate with one another in all measures  promotive  of  thee  great  ends  of  Christ's  death  and resurrection.

But, in order to this holy communion and co-operation of churches, it  is  indispensable  that  they  have  an  intimate  and  approving knowledge of one another, which can only be had and enjoyed in the form of districts. Thus the "congregations in Judea" intimately knew one another, and co-operated. Those in Galatia also knew one another, and co-operated. And while some of the churches or brethren in each district being mutually acquainted with some in another, made the churches of both districts acquainted with one another, they were enabled to co-operate, to the ends of the earth.

These districts are a part of the *circumstances* of Christ's kingdom, as  well  as  the  *manner*  of  maintaining  correspondence  and co-operation  among  them,  and  the  occasions  and  incidents requiring concert and conjoint action. For these, as well as for the circumstantials of any particular community, the Apostles gave no specific directions. It was, indeed, impossible they could: for as the circumstances of particular communities, and of the whole church, vary  at  different  times  and  places,  no  one  set  of  particular, sectional,  or  intersectional  regulations  could  suit  all  these peculiarities and emergencies. These, then, are necessarily left to the wisdom and discretion of the whole community, as the peculiar exigencies and mutations of society may require.

But  in  granting to  the  communities of the saints  this necessary license  of  deciding  what  is  expedient,  orderly,  decent,  and  of public and practical utility in the circumstantials of Christianity, no allowance  is  implied  authorizing  any  interference  with  a  single item of the Christian institution. Hence the necessity of a very clear discrimination, not between "the essentials and non-essentials," for in Divine Christianity there are no non-essentials; but between the family  of  God  and  its  circumstances — between  the  Christian institution  and  its  accidents.  Certain  it  is  that  there  is  a  very manifest  difference  between  any  individual  man,  family, community,  or  institution,  and  its  circumstances.  What  more evident than the difference between a man  and his  apparel,  his house, his neighborhood, his associations and connections?

The Christian institution has its facts, its precepts, its promises, its ordinances, and their meaning or doctrine. These are not matters of policy,  of  arrangement,  of  expediency;  but  of  divine  and immutable  ordination  and  continuance.  Hence  the  faith,  the worship, and the righteousness; or the doctrine, the piety, and the morality  of  the  gospel  institution  are  not  legitimate  subjects  of human  legislation,  alteration,  or  arrangement.  No  man  nor community can touch these and be innocent. These rest upon the wisdom and authority of Jehovah; and he that meddles with these, presumes to do that which the cherubim and seraphim dare not. Whatever, then, is a part of the Christian faith or the Christian hope — whatever constitutes ordinances or precepts of worship, or statutes of moral right and wrong, like the ark of the covenant, is not to be touched with uninspired and uncommissioned hands.

But whether we shall register the churches in a given district, or the members in a particular church; whether we shall meet oftener than once on the Lord's day, or at what hour, and in what sort of house; whether we shall commemorate the Lord's death forenoon or afternoon, before day or after night; whether we shall sit round one board, or in our respective pews; whether we shall sing from book or from memory, prose or verse, etc. etc. are matters in which our conceptions of expediency, decency, and good order may have free scope. Also, whether the churches in a given district shall, by letter, messengers, or stated meetings, once or twice per annum, or oftener, communicate with one another; whether they shall send one, two, or twenty persons, or all go and communicate face to face, or send a letter; and whether they shall annually print, write, or publish their statistics, etc. etc. etc. are the mere circumstantials of the Christian institution.

But co-operation itself is one thing, and the manner of co-operation another.  Co-operation,  as  much  as  the  intercommunion  of Christians, is a part of the Christian institution. We must "*strive together* in our prayers" for one another, and for the salvation of men; and this, if there were no scriptural example nor precept on the subject, is enough. To pray for one another as individuals or communities, implies that we shall assist one another in very way for  which  we  pray  for  one  another:  otherwise  our  prayers  and thanksgivings for each other are mere hypocrisy. He that would pray for the progress of the truth at home and abroad, having it in his  power  to  contribute  a  single  dollar  to  that  end,  and  yet withholds it, shows how little value he sets upon his own prayers, and how much upon his money.

From the days of the Apostles till now co-operative associations of churches have uniformly followed the political distributions of the earth.  Those  "in  Judea,  Galatia,  Achaia,  Pontus,  Cappadocia, Macedonia, Asia, Bithynia," etc. etc. are designations of churches and  brethren  familiar  to  all  New  Testament  readers.  This  is  a matter  of  convenience,  rather  than  of  necessity;  just  as  the churches  in  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,  Ohio,  Kentucky,  etc.  can generally more conveniently and successfully co-operate by states and territories, than by any other divisions or precincts. I say, this is matter of convenience, rather than of necessity. It is of necessity that we co-operate, but of convenience that the churches in one county,  state,  or  nation,  form  regular  ways  and  means  for co-operation.

The  necessity  of  co-operation  is  felt  every  where  and  in  all associations of men. It is a part of the economy of Heaven. What are mountains, but grains of sand! What are oceans, but drops of water! And what the mightiest and most triumphant armies, but collections of individual men! How much more good or ill can be done by co-operation, than by individual enterprise, the history of the world, both civil and ecclesiastic, does little more than detail. One hundred churches,  well disciplined, acting  in  concert, with Christian  zeal,  piety,  humanity — frequently  meeting  together  in committees of ways and means for building up Zion, for fencing in the deserts, cultivating the enclosed fields, watering the dry and barren spots, striving together mightily in prayer, in preaching the word,  in  contributing  to  the  necessities  of  the  saints,  in enlightening the ignorant, and in devising all practicable ways of doing good — would, in a given period, do more than twice the same number  acting  in  their  individual  capacity,  without  concert, without co-operation, and that united energy, always the effect of intelligent and cordial combination.

But, in order to this, Christians must regard the church, or body of Christ,  as  one  community,  though  composed  of  many  small communities, each of which is an organized member of this great national organization; which, under Christ, as the supreme and sole Head, King, Lord, and Lawgiver, has the conquest of the whole world in its prayers, aims, plans, and efforts. Hence, there must be such  an  understanding  and  agreement  between  these  particular congregations as will suffice to a recognition and approval of their several  acts;  so  that  the  members,  or  the  measures  of  one community shall be treated with the respect due to them at home, in whatever community they may happen to be presented. On this principle  only  can  any  number  of  independent  and  distinct communities of any sort — political, commercial, literary, moral, or religious — act in concert with mutual advantage to themselves, and with a proper reference to the general good.

Any  one  who  seeks  apostolic  sanctions  for  these  view  of co-operation, will find ample authority in the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles. Paul addresses "*all the saints* in Rome" in his Epistle to  the  Romans.  Now  in  Rome  there  were  sundry  churches,  as appears from chap. 16: 5, 10, 11, 14, 15. These all he addresses as one single community. Again he represents "all the churches of the Gentiles" as uniting in thanks to Priscilla and Aquila, 16: 4. He also represents "the churches of Christ" as uniting salutations by him to the Romans, ver. 16. In his letters to the Corinthians he addresses the church of Corinth, "All the saints which are in all Achaia," and "all them in every place who call upon the name of Jesus  Christ."  1  Cor.  1:2;  2  Cor.  1:1.  There  he  exhorts  to  "be perfectly  joined  together  in  the  same  mind  and  in  the  same judgments."  1  Cor.  1:10.  "The  churches  in  Asia  united  in  their salutations to the Corinthians," chap. 16: 19. He speaks in the 2d Epistle of all the churches in Achaia, as "helping together in prayer for him" and his companions, and of their helping him on his way in the work of the Lord. In the 8th chapter he informs them of the grace of God bestowed on "all churches in Macedonia," evinced by the liberality of their united contributions to the saints. He also speaks of an equality in the mutual contributions of churches in one co-operation — and of a brother chosen by sundry communities to travel with the Apostles, 8: 14, 18, 19.; and of his accompanying brethren as "messengers of the churches." The whole 9th chapter of this epistle speaks of the co-operation of the churches in public contributions for common objects. Paul, and all the brethren with him, unite in the epistle to "all the churches in Galatia." These he commands to "bear one another's burdens, and thus to fulfil the law of Christ." But, indeed, all the *catholic epistles* are unequivocal proofs that co-operation is  of the very essence of the Christian institution. Such are some of Paul's epistles, both the epistles of Peter, the 1st of John, and that of James and Jude. The very basis of  such  general  or  universal  letters  is  the  fact,  that  all  the communities  of  Christ  constitute  but  one  body,  and  are individually  and  mutually  bound  to  co-operate  in  all  things pertaining to a common salvation.
