25. The Christian Ministry 

"He gave some apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, some pastors and teachers for the perfecting of the saints for *the work of the ministry,* for the edifying of the body of Christ; till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ," etc. For the  setting  up  of  the  Christian  institution  officers  extraordinary were needed. So was it in the Jewish, and so is it every institution, human  and  divine.  But  when  an  institution  is  set  up,  it  only requires an ordinary ministry or administration of its affairs. All the extraordinary gifts vouchsafed to Moses, and to the Apostles and  Prophets  of  the  gospel  institution,  ceased  when  these institutions were fully developed and established. Still a regular and  constant  ministry  was  needed  among  the  Jews,  and  is  yet needed  among  the  Christians;  and  both  of  these  by  divine authority. 

Natural gifts for a natural state of things, and supernatural gifts for a supernatural state of things, are, in the wisdom of both God and man, apposite and needful. Hence, even in the apostolic age, there were officers without, as well as with, miraculous endowments. "Having, then, gifts differing according to the office, or grace that is  given  to  us — if  prophecy,  let  us  prophesy  according  to  the measure of our faith; or ministry, let us attend on our ministering; he that teacheth, on teaching; he that exhorteth, on exhortation; he that distributeth, with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence." God has therefore conferred various gifts on the church for the effectual administration of its affairs. He has placed in it "*helps* and *governments,*" as well as Apostles and Prophets. 

The standing and immutable ministry of the Christian community is  composed  of  Bishops,  Deacons,  and  Evangelists.  Of  each  of these is but one order, though possessing great diversities of gifts. There  have  been  bishops,  deacons,  and  evangelists,  with  both ordinary and extraordinary gifts. Still the office is now, and ever was,  the  same.  In  ancient  times  official  and  unofficial  persons sometimes possessed miraculous gifts. Those in high office were also generally of those most eminently gifted with extraordinary powers. Superficial readers have, therefore, sometimes concluded that,  inasmuch  as  bishops,  deacons  and  especially  evangelists, frequently possessed these manifestations of the Holy Spirit, with the ceasing of those gifts, the offices themselves also expired. This is a great mistake. Officers there must be while there are offices, or services to be performed. So long as the human system needs sight, hearing, and feeling, there will be eyes, ears, and hands. So long also  as  the  Christian  body  is  an  organized  body,  having  many services to perform, it must have organs or officers by which to enjoy itself and operate on society. 

There  are,  indeed,  necessarily  as  many  offices  in  ever  body  as there are services to be performed to it, or by it. This is the root and reason of all the offices in all the universe of God. Our planet needs diverse celestial services to be performed to it. Hence, the sun, moon, and stars are celestial officers ministering to it. The eye,  the  ear,  the  tongue,  the  hand,  the  foot,  are,  for  the  same reason, officers in the human body, essentially serving it in its vital interests  and  enjoyments;  and  by  means  of  these  organs,  it performs important functions to other bodies. 

Experience,  as  well as  observation, has taught  us that "practice makes perfect," and that "whatever is every person's business is no person's  business."  Hence  arose  the  custom  among  men  of communicating  certain  offices  to  particular  individuals.  The philosophy of such elections and ordinances is found in the fact, that  special  services  are  best  performed  by  special  organs  or agents, whose special province and duty is to attend to them. 

As the Christian system is a perfect system, it wisely provides for its own perpetuity and prosperity by creating all necessary offices and filling them with suitable persons. We have said these offices are  three,  and  of  perpetual,  because  of  necessary  existence. *Bishops,* whose office it is to preside over, to instruct, and to edify the community — to feed the church of the Lord with knowledge and understanding — and to watch for their souls as those that must give account to the Lord at his appearing and his kingdom, compose the first  class.  *Deacons,*  or  servants — whether  called  treasurers, almoners,  stewards,  door-keepers,  or  messengers,  constitute  the second. For the term *deacon* originally included all public servants whatever,  though  now  most  commonly  confined  to  one  or  two classes; and improperly, no doubt, to those only who attend to the mere temporal interests of the community. They are distinguished persons,  called  and  commissioned  by  the  church,  (and consequently are always responsible to it,) to serve in any of these capacities.  Evangelists,  however,  though  a  class  of  public functionaries created by the church, do not serve it directly; but are by  it  sent  out  into  the  world,  and  constitute  the  third  class  of functionaries belonging to the Christian system. 

As there is more scrupulosity on some minds concerning the third class of Evangelists, than concerning either Bishops or Deacons, we shall take occasion to speak more explicitly and fully upon the nature and necessity, as well as upon the authority of this office. Evangelists,  as  the  term  indicates,  are  persons  devoted  to  the preaching of the word, to the making of converts, and the planting of  churches.  It  is,  indeed,  found  but  three  times  in  the  New Covenant; but the verb from which it comes — viz. to *evangelize,* is in some of its branches found almost sixty times in that volume. "To evangelize" and "to do the work of an evangelist" are phrases of  equal  import,  and  indicate  the  same  duties,  rights,  and privileges. 

Among the offices which were comprehended in the apostleship, none required more varied endowments than that of the Evangelist. The gift of tongues was amongst the qualifications necessary to those who, after the ascension, first undertook this work. But the qualifications for this office, so far as the gift of tongues or the knowledge of language is concerned, are not immutably fixed. It depends upon the field of labor which the Evangelist is to occupy, whether  he  must  speak  on  language  or  more.  His  work  is  to proclaim the word intelligibly and persuasively — to immerse all the believers, or converts of his ministry — and to plant and organize churches wherever he may have occasion; and then teach them to keep the commandments and ordinances of the Lord. 

Take, for example, the sketch given us by Luke of the labors of Philip the Evangelist, one of the first who wore that designation. One  of  the  seven  ministers  of  the  Jerusalem  church,  after  his diaconate was vacated  by the dispersion of that  community, he commenced  his  evangelical  labors.  He  turned  his  face  towards Samaria, and preached and baptized amongst the Samaritans: for, we are told, when the Samaritans believed Philip preaching the things concerning the kingdom of God and the Lord Jesus, they were  baptized,  both  men  and  women.  He  also  converted  the Ethiopian Eunuch; and then, passing from Azotus, he "preached *in all the cities* till he came to Cesarea," where he afterwards resided. The next notice we have of him is found in Acts 21:8. "We," says Luke,  "who  were  of  Paul's  company,  departed,  and  came  into Cesarea, and entered into the house of Philip the Evangelist, one of the seven, and abode with him. He had four virgin daughters that did  prophesy."  Evident,  then,  it  is  that  he  obtained  the  title *Evangelist*  from  his  itinerant  labors  in  the  gospel  and  in  the converting of men. His possession of the gift of the Holy Spirit was no more peculiar to him as an evangelist, than as deacon of the church in Jerusalem; for while in the diaconate of that church he seems to have been as full of the Holy Spirit as when visiting all the cities from Azotus to Cesarea. 

Convening  converts  into  societies,  and  organizing  them  into worshipping assemblies, are inseparably connected with the right of converting them. Casually, in his letters to Timothy, Paul seems to define the work of an Evangelist. He says, "Preach the word; be instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all long-suffering and teaching; endure affliction; *do the work of an Evangelist;* fulfil thy ministry." "Let no man despise thy youth. Till I  come  give  attendance  to  reading,  to  exhortation,  to  teaching. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, according to prophecy — by the laying on the hands of the presbytery or eldership." "Meditate upon these things; give thyself wholly to them, that thy profiting may appear to all: take heed to thyself and to thy teaching; continue in them: for in doing this, thou shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee."1 This seems to be the office of an Evangelist which the Lord gave the church after his ascension. 

Setting things in order in the churches — the committing the same office to  faithful  men,  who shall  be able to  instruct  others — the ordaining of elders, and a general superintendence of the affairs of churches, seem to have been also lodged in the hands of Timothy and Titus as agents of the Apostles. How far these works are yet necessary, and how far the superintendence of them may be safely lodged  in  the  hands  of  select  Evangelists  as  *respects  infant communities,*  may  be,  with  many  a  question  of  dubious interpretation.  But  that  Evangelists  are  to  separate  into communities their own converts, teach and superintend them till they  are  in  a  condition  to  take  care  of  themselves,  is  as unquestionably a part of the office of an Evangelist as praying, or preaching, or baptizing. 

But we shall be asked, 'Is not preaching and baptizing, and even teaching,  the  common  privilege  of  all  disciples,  as  they  have opportunity?' And we also ask in answer, 'Is it not the privilege of all fathers to teach their own children, and to preside over their own  families?'  But  who  will  thence  infer,  that  all  fathers  are teachers and presidents, does not more shock common sense, than he who infers that all disciples, as such, are evangelists, pastors, and teachers, because we concede that in certain cases it is the privilege of all citizens of Christ's kingdom to preach, baptize, and teach.  Every  citizen  of  Christ's  kingdom  has,  in  virtue  of  his citizenship, equal rights, privileges and immunities. So has every citizen of the United States. Yet  all citizens are not  legislators, magistrates, judges, governors, etc. Before any community, civil or religious,  is  organized,  every  man  has  equal  rights  to  do  what seemeth good in his own eyes. But when organized, and persons appointed  to  office,  then  whatever  rights,  duties,  privileges  are conferred on particular persons, cannot of right belong to those who have transferred them; any more than a person cannot both give and keep the same thing. 

But  there  are  some  duties  and  privileges  we  cannot  wholly communicate  to  others.  Parents  cannot  wholly  transfer  the education of their children to others; neither can a master transfer all his duties to a steward or overseer. No more can the citizens of Christ's kingdom wholly transfer their duties to preach and teach Christ. To enlighten the ignorant, to persuade the unbelieving, to exhort the disobedient when they fall in our way and we have the ability  or  the  opportunity,  is  an  intransferable  duty.  Even  the church  of  Rome,  with  all  her  clerical  pride,  commands  and authorizes  *lay  baptism,*  when  a  Priest  is  not  convenient.  A Christian is by profession a preacher of truth and righteousness, both by precept and example. *He may of right preach, baptize, and dispense  the  supper,  as  well  as  pray  for  all  men,  when circumstances  demand  it.*  This  concession  does  not,  however, either dispense with the necessity of having evangelists, bishops, and deacons; not, having them, does it authorize any individual to assume  to  do  what  has  been  given  in  charge  to  them.  Liberty without licentiousness, and government without tyranny, is the true genius of the Christian institution. 

While, then, the Christian system  allows every man "as he has received a gift to minister as a good steward of the manifold grace of  God,"  it  makes  provision  for  choosing  and  setting  apart qualified persons for all its peculiar services, necessary to its own edification and comfort, as well as to its usefulness in the world. It provides for its own perpetuity and its growth in the wisest and most  practical  manner.  Its  whole  wisdom  consists  in  four points: — 1st. It establishes the necessary offices for its perpetuity and  growth.  2d.  It  selects  the  best-qualified  persons  for  those offices.  3d.  It  consecrates  or  sets  those  persons  apart  to  those offices. 4th. It commands them to give themselves wholly to the work, that their improvement may keep pace with the growth of the  body,  and  be  apparent  to  all.  Can  any  person  point  out  an imperfection in this plan? — ! 

All its officers, whether for its services at home or abroad, when fully  proved,  are  to  be  formally  and  solemnly  set  apart  by  the imposition  of  the  hands  of  the  presbytery  or  eldership  of  the church. The whole community chooses — the seniors ordain. *This is the apostolic tradition.* Let those unacquainted with the volume examine the apostolic law and usage; Acts 6:2-6. So the Christian system  in  its  elections  and  ordinations  began.  *It  is  immutable.* Therefore this system obtains in all cases. The qualifications for any office are always founded in the nature of the office. They are generally detailed, but not always, because the *work to be done* is the best guide in ascertaining the qualifications of the doer of it. 

We say the seniors of elders always ordain. Popery says, 'None but those on whom the apostolic hands have been laid can of right ordain.' *Such an idea is not in the Christian system.* The seniors always lay on hands, whether hands have been laid on them or not. This is true Protestantism. Better still, it is true Bibleism. *Nay, it is the Christian System.* The Apostles laid on hands because *seniors,* and not because *apostles.* This is the jet of a controversy of fifteen hundred  years'  standing.  It  has  been  very  generally,  almost universally  misstated  and  overlooked.  Protestants  are  as  much Papists  in  this,  as  the  Papists  are  Protestants  in  disowning Protestantism.  It  is  assumed  by  Romanists,  and  conceded  by Protestants, that "*holy hands*" are official hands by a *jure Divino.* They are sometimes, but not always. But *Christian elders,* (for I do not mean mere old men,) who have long walked in the ways of the Lord, have holy hands, and much more power with and from the Lord, then ever dwelt in any pontiff or pretended vicar of Christ, in twelve hundred and sixty years. 

In proof that seniors lay  on hands,  we appeal  to  the fact,  Acts 6:1-15 :, for the Apostles were the oldest converts in Jerusalem. We appeal also to the fact that the presbytery or eldership laid hands on Timothy, and gave him the gift or office of an evangelist. And  are  there  two  rules  of  ordination  in  one system!  Paul  and Barnabas,  though  *Apostles,*  were  themselves  ordained  by  the church  of  Antioch  by  its  presbytery.  Consequently,  *seniors  in Christ, as such,* can, of divine warrant, lay hands on any persons, for any office to which the church has elected them. It must be done also by prayer and fasting. See  Acts 6:6; Acts 13:3; Acts 14:23. 

Persons may be juniors in years and seniors in Christ. Timothy, says Paul, "*lay hands suddenly on no man.*" This implies that the ordained were juniors in the Lord; and until they had attained some character and standing as seniors, (even Timothy himself,) were not to consent to their ordination. Perhaps it may be necessary to say that classic presbytery and the presbytery of a single church are very  different  institutions.  The  Apostles  ordained  *elders*  (a presbytery) in every church. They did not make young men old, but set apart those that were seniors in the Lord to the office of overseers. They did not make juniors *seniors,* but they made elders *bishops.* 

The community, the church, the multitude of the faithful, are the fountain  of official power. This  power descends from  the body itself — not from its servants. Servants made by servants are servants of servants; and such are all the clergy of the Man of Sin. But the body of Christ, under him as its head, animated and led by his spirit, is the fountain and spring of all official power and privilege. How much surer and purer is ecclesiastic authority thus derived from Christ the head, immediately through his body, that when derived through a long, doubtful, corrupt dynasty of bishops or pontiffs! The church is the mother of all the sons and priests of God; and to look for authority to her servants or creatures, as do all sorts of Papists, whether Catholic or Protestant, is to worship and serve  the  creature  more  than  the  Creator — a  species  of  idolatry worthy only of the darkest night of the darkest day of the dark ages. 

But the church needs messengers for special occasions — not only her  stated  deacons  and  ministers,  but  ministers  extraordinary. These too are selected by the church or churches in a given district, and *commissioned by their letters.* They are not consecrated by imposition of hands, but *approved by letters* from the community. Are we asked for authority? We produce it with pleasure. 1 Cor. 16:3. is just to the point: "And," says Paul to the saints in Corinth, "when I come *whomsoever you shall approve by letters,* them will I send to bring your liberality to Jerusalem." This is the apostolic usage in such cases. In the second epistle Paul says, "We have sent Titus the brother (Luke, we opine) whose praise is in the gospel, (written  by  him,)  throughout  all  the  churches — who  was  also *chosen by the churches* to travel with us this bounty," etc. 

The  Christian  system  demands  for  its  perpetuity  and  for  its prosperity at home and abroad, bishops, deacons, and evangelists. Its bishops teach, preside, and execute the laws of Christ in all its convocations.  The  deacons,  a  large  and  diverse  class  of functionaries,  composed  of  stewards,  treasurers,  almoners, door-keepers, etc. as the case may require, wait continually upon its  various  services.  Its  evangelists,  possessed  of  proper qualifications, ordained and consecrated to the work of the Lord in converting sinners and  planting  churches, by  a presbytery, or a board of seniors competent to the prudent discharge of the duty, are  constantly  engaged  in  multiplying  its  members.  These ministers of the word are commanded to be wholly engrossed in this work, and consequently to be fully sustained by their brethren in it. They are held responsible to all the holy brethren, and to the Lord at his appearing and his kingdom, for the faithful discharge of that sacred trust confided in them. 

What  an efficient  institution is  that over which Christ presides, when well understood and fully carried out in all its details! With its bishops and deacons at home, and its evangelists abroad, wholly devoted to the faithful discharge of their respective trusts; men of experience, faith, piety, morality, full of zeal, energy, benevolence, co-operating with all similar institutions, supported by the prayers and free-will offerings of all the united people, having the love of God in their hearts, and heaven in their eye, what may they not achieve of glory to God, of good to men, and honor to themselves! Of such an army of the faith, in full operation and concert, it might indeed be asked, "Who is this that looketh forth as the morning, fair as the moon, bright as the sun, and terrible as an army with banners!" 

**1** 1 Timothy 4; 2 Timothy 4

