28. Heresy 

Schisms  and  heresies  are  matters  strongly  reprobated  in  the Christian Scriptures. That they may be guarded against with due care, they must be contemplated and understood in their true and proper  scriptural  attributes.  We  shall  therefore  first  attempt  to define them. 

The term *schism* is found but *eight* times in the apostolic writings. When applied to a garment, Matt. 9:16. Mark 2:21. it is properly translated *rent;* applied to a concourse of people, John 7:43; 9:16; 10:19, it is translated *division;* when applied to the church by Paul, 1 Cor. 1:10; 11:18; 12:25. it denotes *division* or *alienation* — not on account of faith, doctrines, or opinions — but on account of men as leaders or chiefs among the brethren. So the connections in which it is found always  indicate.  It  is  a division  as  respects  *internal union,* or the union of heart and affection, only tending to a breach of  visible  or  outward  union,  and  therefore  reprobated  by  the Apostle. Such are its New Testament acceptations. 

Schisms may then exist where there is the most perfect agreement in faith, in doctrine, in all religious tenets. Undue attachment to certain  persons,  to  the  disparagement  of  others,  partial  regards because of personal preferences, are the true elements of schism or division as it appeared in Corinth, and as the word is used in the New  Testament.  But  few  persons,  now-a-days,  can  correctly appreciate  the  force  of  the  word  *schisms*  in  the  apostolic  age, because but a very few experimentally know the intimacies, the oneness  of  heart  and  soul,  that  obtained  and  prevailed  in  the Christian profession, while all was genuine and uncorrupt. A union formed on Christian principles — a union with Christ and his people, in  views,  sentiments,  feelings,  aims,  and  pursuits — a  real co-partnery for eternity, almost annihilated individuality itself, and inseparably cemented into one spirit all the genuine members of Christ's body. Kindred drops do not more readily mingle into one mass, than flowed the souls of primitive Christians together in all their  aspirations,  loves,  delights,  and  interests.  Hence  arose  the jealousy in the Apostle Paul when first he learned that particular persons  in  Corinth  began  to  attract  to  themselves  notice  and attachment  for  mere  personal,  individual,  and  fleshly considerations, as leaders or chiefs in the Christian family. In these indications he already saw the dissolution of the church. Although yet but one visible community, having one Lord, one faith, one baptism,  one  table,  one  ostensible  supreme  and  all-controlling interest; still, in these attachments to particular persons he not only saw  a  real  division  or  breach  in  the  hearts  of  the  people,  but foresaw that it would issue in positive, actual, and visible disunion or heresy. And here we are led to inquire into the scriptural import of the word *heresy.* 

*Hairesis,*  strictly  and  literally  indicative  of  *choice*  or  *option,*  is anglicised *heresy,* and properly rendered *sect* or *faction,* and by implication *discord* and *contention.* It is found only *nine* times in the New Testament. In the Acts 5: 17, we have it rendered "the sect of the Sadducees;"—Acts 15:5 "the sect of the Pharisees;"—Acts 24:5,  "the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes;"—Acts  24:14,  "after  the  way which they call *heresy* (sect,) so worship I," says Paul; — Acts 26:5, "after the most strict *sect* of our religion I lived a Pharisee;"—Acts 28:22.  "as  for  this  *sect*  (of  the  Christians)  we  know  that  it  is everywhere spoken against." Besides these six occurrences we find it twice used by Paul in his epistles, and once by Peter. 1 Cor. 11:19. "For there must be *heresies* (sects) among you." Gal. 5:20. "Sedition,  heresies."  2  Peter  2:1.  "Shall  bring  in  damnable heresies." In the common version it is, then, five times rendered *sect,* and four times *heresy.* 

As the word *sect* or *heresy,* found only in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles, does not always in the former simply mean a *party,* without any regard to its tenets, the term has nothing in it either reproachful or honorable — nothing virtuous or vicious. Hence it is equally applied to Pharisees, Sadducees, Nazarenes, or Christians, without any insinuation as the character of the party. It is only once rendered  *heresy*  in  the  "Acts,"  and  in  that  place  it  ought  most obviously to have been *sect.* Paul had been accused by Tertullus (Acts 24:6.) with the crime of being "a ringleader of the *sect* of the Nazarenes." Now in vindicating himself from any censure in this case, he ought to have met the charge under the same title. This he did in the original; for in verse 5th, in the indictment, and in verse 14th,  in  his  defence,  we  have  the  same  word  *hairesis.*  How injudicious,  then,  was  it  on  the  part  of  our  translators  and  the Vulgate to make Tertullus accuse Paul of a *sect,* and to make Paul defend himself of a *heresy,* when both Tertullus and Paul used the same word in their speeches as reported by Luke in the original! 

In the new version this word is, as it should be, uniformly rendered *sect.* In the Epistles, and apparently once in  Acts, it is used as though it included an idea of censure or guilt. Paul defends himself from  the  accusation  of  Tertullus.  Here,  then,  a  question arises — "Why  should  the  term  *hairesis*  import  blame  in  its *Christian,* and none in its *Jewish* acception! We answer, Because among  the  Jews  sects  or  parties  did  not  terminate  as  among Christians,  in  separate  communities  or  communions.  They resembled  the  high  and  low  church  parties  in  the  Episcopalian communion;  or  the  different  and  numerous  sects  among  the Romanists,  viz. — Benedictines,  Franciscans,  Dominicans,  Jesuits, etc.  which  never  terminate  in  a  breach  of  communion  or co-operation  as  one  church.  Thus  the  Pharisees,  Sadducees, Herodians, etc. frequented the same temple, altar, priesthood, and united  in  all  the  same  acts  of  worship.  Not  so  the  Jews  and Samaritans:  they  were  real  *sects*  in  the  Christian  sense.  Again, among the Jews the bond of union was national and fleshly; and, therefore, parties could not destroy it. With us it is spiritual, social, cordial — one faith, one hope, one spirit; and parties are destructive in the superlative degree. 

To this view there is but one plausible objection; and that we meet in the answer to the question, '*Why did Paul defend himself from the accusation of Tertullus as indicating censure, if sects among the Jews were such harmless and inoffensive things?*' We answer, There is no blame in the simple imputation of a sect, but in the ideas which Tertullus connected with it. The Romans had agreed to protect the Jews in the enjoyment of their religion, and they wished in the presence of Felix to make Paul appear an apostate from that religion — "a pestilent fellow, a mover of *sedition,* a ringleader of the  sect  of  the  Nazarenes" — that  he  might  be  from  under  the protection granted to the Jews' religion. From this view only can we see the wisdom of  Paul's  defence. He admits the charge of being a *sectary,* but in no criminal sense — worshipping the same God  with  them,  believing  also  every  word  in  their  law  and Prophets,  and  cherishing  the  same  hope  of  a  future  life  in  the resurrection of the dead; and thus evinces that nothing offensive or criminal  could  be  imputed  to  him  on  account  of  his  being  a ringleader of the sect of the Nazarenes. 

In the Christian epistles it is, however, used in a bad sense, and is always connected with censure. This may have been the reason why King James' version changes the translation into *heresies,* or as  in  the  case  of  *baptism,  bishop,*  etc.  anglicises  rather  than translates the word. It is not, however, a good or sufficient reason, because it necessarily imposes upon the English reader that *heresy* in the epistles, and *sect* in the Acts of the Apostles, are two distinct and different things; and this, of course, not only obscures those passages,  but  also  prevents  the  clear  intelligence  of  a  matter essential to our duty and our happiness. The acceptation, however, is not materially different in the epistles, except in the relation of things. When the word *sect* is connected with a proper name, such as the *sect* of the Pharisees, the *sect* of the Sadducees, or the *sect* of the Christians, it is used in a middle sense, neither as intimating truth or error, good or evil; but if it be applied to a party formed in a  community  which  admits  of  no  division  or subdivision  in  its nature,  because  necessarily  tending  to  its  corruption  and destruction; then, in that relation and sense, a sect is a destructive and condemnable thing. Now in the Epistles it is always taken in this sense, and is  ranked with  *factions,*  as a work of the flesh, carnal and destructive, and doomed to the judgments of Heaven. 

Still, in its scriptural application, whether used by Luke, Paul, or Peter and it is found in no other writer, it never relates to doctrine, tenet, opinion, or faith. There is not, in sacred usage, any *tenet,* or *doctrine,* which is called *heresy* or *sect.* Hence that ecclesiastical definition, viz. — "*Heresy denotes some erroneous opinion, tenet, or doctrine obstinately persisted in,*" is without any countenance from the New Testament. *Heresy* and *heretical,* in the lips of Paul and Peter,  and  in  the  lips  of  an  ancient  or  modern  schoolman,  or churchman, are to very different things.  

But some allege that any doctrine that makes division is heretical, and therefore condemnable. It may be admitted, for the sake of argument,  that  any  doctrine  or  action  that  makes  division  is heretical or divisive; but on this account it is not condemnable; because in that sense Jesus Christ was a heretic and his gospel heresy: for he came to make divisions on earth, and did make a sect; and of course, his doctrine is divisive or heretical. 

Now if we say Jesus was a *heretic,* and his gospel *heresy,* and his followers *sectaries,* does not this divest the word of any bad or culpable significance, and make both heretics, heresies, and sects innocent things! It does, so far as all without Christ's kingdom or institution are concerned. But this is the all-important difference in this place; Christians, contradistinguished from Jews, Mussulmen, Pagans, Infidels, are lawfully, righteously, and innocently a sect, a heresy: but a sect among these is corrupt, treasonable, and most reprehensible, according to every precept, doctrine, and saying of the New Institution. Thus a man may be a Christian, or of the sect of the Nazarenes, but not a Lutheran, a Calvinist, an Arminian, without blame. 

The words *schisms* and *heresy* so far explained, may we not regard schism as the cause, and heresy as the effect? or, in other words, must we not regard sects as the effects of schisms? The philosophy of  the  whole  matter,  then,  is,  that  separation  is  the  effect  of alienation of heart, alienation the fruit of rival attachments, which in the church generally begin in personal sympathies or personal antipathies, and end in detaching the subjects of them from the body of Christ. In this view of the matter Paul seems to reason, 1 Cor. 11:18-19. — "There are *schisms* among you — for there must be *sects* among you, that the approved may be made manifest." The schisms  in  Corinth  began  in  particular  predilections  for  great teachers;  such  as  Paul,  Apollos,  Cephas.  These  preferences violated that *unity of spirit,* that oneness of heart essential to one body in Christ; and that led to parties in the church, displayed in the manner they celebrated the supper. The same spirit in other communities ultimately led to visible separations and distinct sects, as among the professed members of Christ's body at the present day. 

Paul, in commenting on this most ancient schism, further observes, that there *must,* of necessity, be sects in such a state of things, that "the *approved* may be made manifest." So true it is that all strifes, contentions, parties, and sects grow out of corruption. Sects are the egress  of  corruptions.  The  approved  hold  to  Christ,  and  thus become manifest; the disapproved follow human leaders, and are also made manifest. There appears no other cure for a corrupt and mixed  community  than  heresies  or  sects.  It  is  as  wise  and benevolent  a  provision  in  a  remedial  system,  that  incurable corruption should work out in this way, as that law in the animal kingdom which forces to the surface all unfriendly humors, and congregates into swellings and biles those vicious particles which would otherwise vitiate the whole system, and fatally terminate in the ruin of the body. 

Men, indeed, do not fall in love with Paul, Peter, and Cephas, in the partizan sense, till they have lost some of their love for Christ. Hence  the  first  indication  of  personal  regards,  or  of  sectarian attachment,  is  the  first  proof  of  declension,  backsliding,  or apostasy. The partizan attachment is of the essence of the first sin, and carries deeply concealed in its core the first element of hatred. Thus  we  observe  that  he  loves  that  Wesley  for  any  sectarian attribute, hates Calvin just in ratio of his attachment to his leader; as  he  who  loves  Calvin  for  his  humanisms  hates  Wesley  for opposing them. While he that loves only what is Christian in the two,  in  no  sense  hates  either;  but  grieves  for  the  errors  and delinquencies  of  both.  If  for  no  other  reason,  we  ought  most devoutly and ardently to eschew partyism; for this it ought to be abjured, viz. — that our hatred of one party will always be in the ratio of our love for its antagonist; and in all such cases both our love and our hatred are obnoxious to the reprobation of God, and lie, indeed, under the doom of his express condemnation. 

On this account we presume it is that the next place we find this word *hairesis,* and the only time it is again found in Paul's epistles, it stands immediately after "*factions*" and before "*envyings*" and "*murders,*" in Paul's enumeration and classification of the works of the flesh, Gal. 5:20-21. the perpetrators of which Paul strongly and repeatedly affirmed, shall not "enter into the kingdom of God." He says,  "The  works  of  the  flesh  are  manifest,  which  are these — fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, sorcery, enmities, strifes,  emulations,  wraths,  brawlings,  *factions,  sects,*  envyings, murders, intoxication," etc. etc. Every sectary is, then, Paul being in the chair of judgment, a fleshly man, and without the precincts of the kingdom of God. A severe judgment, truly! How shall we understand it? — ! 

It is now still more evident that *heresies* are not mere opinions, tenets, doctrines, or theories; for who will affirm that opinions, tenets, or theories, as such, are works of the flesh? Or who will say that fleshly principles are the roots or reasons of mere opinions, tenets, or theories, etc.? Corrupt opinions, indeed, may be more naturally  propagated  or  received  by  corrupt  men;  but  to  make opinions or tenets, even those sectarian opinions on which some parties  are  founded,  works  of  the  flesh,  is  to  confound  mental imbecility or a defective education, with depravity of heart; for nothing can be called a work of the flesh that partakes not of the corruptions of the heart. *Hairesis* in this place, then, means sects, as it always does in the New Testament. 

Still the question recurs, Are all religious sects works of the flesh? Paul  makes  no  exceptions.  We  dare  not.  He  speaks  not  of philosophic, political, or foreign factions and sects; but of those appertaining  to  the  Christian  institution.  Among  the  Jews  Paul himself  was  a  *Pharisee;*  among  the  political  castes  he  was  a *Roman;*  but  in  religion  he  was  a  Christian;  not  a  Calvinist, Arminian, or Methodist; but a Christian. Indeed, Paul himself, in his history of sectaries, or of the founders and makers of religious parties, traces all their zeal and effort to the stomach, rather than to the conscience, or love of truth. "Mark them," says he, "who cause divisions and offences  contrary to  the doctrine which  you have received, and avoid them; for such persons do not serve our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own *belly;* and by flattery and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple." Surely such sectaries and sects are "the works of the flesh." 

But here we ought to define a *factionist* and a *sectary,* since now a days we have some sectarians that are not factionists, and some factionists  and  factions  that  are  more  than  mere  sectaries.  The factionist, or as Paul calls him, the "heretic," makes the faction. The faction are those who take part with him. While the ordinary sectaries are those who are simply led by the heretic, beguiled by his  flatteries  and  fair  speeches,  without  any  sinister  motive impelling  their  course.  There  are  many  sectarians  who,  in  the simplicity of their hearts, imagine their party to be the true and only church of Christ, and therefore conscientiously adhere to it. There are others who think that no party is the church of Christ, but that he has a church in all parties — an invisible church — to which they think themselves to belong, and therefore fraternize with all of a similar stamp in all parties so far as known to them. These differ much from the schismatics, heretics, and factionists of Paul. Those either made, or labored to keep up, a party or a sect; and all such persons are corrupt fleshly men; because, from pride of their own opinion, from emulation, ambition, or the love of money, they are prompted to create or to keep up a faction or sect favorable to their views  and  interests.  These  serve  their  own  appetites  and  mind earthly things. But a great mass of sectaries are following, as they imagine, Jesus Christ and his Apostles, under the name and tenets of Luther, Calvin, Wesley, etc. They are, without knowing it, the mere followers of men: for they examine nothing for themselves by a constant and habitual reference to the Bible. 

Now, what may be the amount of carnality and fleshly or worldly influence that keeps them there, and what may be the amount of long-suffering  and  forgiveness  exercised  towards  them  from heaven, I presume not to dogmatize; but that the factionist — the person who makes a party, and he who labors to keep it up, are certainly earthly, sensual, and demoniacal; and, as such, not of the kingdom of God, we cannot but assert as a conviction deep and rational, derived from the most impartial examination of the sacred scriptures — from the clearest and most ample testimony of the Holy Spirit, speaking to us in the words of Prophets and Apostles. 

The Christian party are "built on the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and on Jesus the Messiah, himself the chief corner stone,"  and  therefore  *on  the  Christian  Scriptures  alone;*  not, indeed,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  Jewish,  but  as  the development and full revelation of all that concerns Christ and his kingdom contained in those scriptures. Now, all other parties that are in  any  way diverse from  the Christian party  are built  upon some  alloy — some  creed,  formula,  or  human  institution supplementary  to  the  apostolic  laws  and  customs.  This  alloy  is what makes the party. So many items of the Apostles' doctrine and so many notions of Calvin combined produce the compound called Calvinism. So many items of Luther's opinions, compounded with the Apostles' teaching, make Lutheranism. And so many portions of Wesley's speculations, compounded with certain portions of the New  Testament,  make  the  compound  called  Methodism.  The Christian ingredients in these compounds, so far as they are not neutralized by the human alloy, make the Christians among them; while the alloy makes the sectary. Take away all that belongs to the founder of the sect in all these parties, and they would certainly coalesce and form one community. 

Now, we do not suppose that there is the same guilt in forming a new  Protestant  party  that  there  was  in  first  of  all  forming  the Roman  Catholic,  the  Greek,  or  any  of  the  ancient  sects.  The modern sects have been got up with the desire of getting back to primitive Christianity; the ancient sects arose directly from the lust of  power — from  fleshly,  selfish,  and  worldly  motives.  Now, however,  since  we  have  so  largely  eaten  of  the  gall  and wormwood,  of  the  bitter  fruits  of  sects  and  parties;  and  have learned the cause, the cure, and the preventive of sectarianism, alas for all that are found keeping up the old landmarks of strife, or laying the foundation for new rivalries, partialities, and antipathies, to  arise  and  pollute  many,  to  retard  the  progress  of  the  gospel abroad, and to foster the spirit of infidelity at home. 

There remains another occurrence of *hairesis* (sect) in the writings of  Peter,  not  yet  formally  examined.  We  shall  now  specially consider  it.  This  Apostle  says,  "There  shall  be  false  teachers among you, who will privately introduce *destructive sects,* denying even  the  Lord  that  bought  them,  bringing  on  themselves  swift destruction; and many will follow their bad practices." Paul, in his valedictory  to  the  Ephesians,  also  speaks  of  "grievous  wolves devouring the flock, and of men rising out of their own society to draw away disciples after them, speaking perverse things." From these intimation we learn that the Apostles Paul and Peter foresaw the rise of sectaries and sects; and both of them, it is worthy of remark, distinctly connected the sects with sectarian teachers: for all sects have been originated by false teachers or by corrupt men. Sectaries, it would appear, occupy the same place under Christ that false Prophets filled under Moses. Need we, then, infer the danger of keeping up religious sects, or go on to prove that every one who builds up a party is a partaker of the crime with him who set it up? 

It behooves all men, then, who wish to be approved by the Lord at his coming, to be up and doing to purge and cleanse the Christian profession  from  every  root  and  branch  of  sectarianism,  and  to endeavor to destroy those destructive sects that have been a sort of Pandora's box to the human race; that have filled the profession with hypocrites, the world with infidels, and retarded for so many centuries the conversion of both Jews and Gentiles to the Christian faith. 

Finally,  while  endeavoring  to  abolish  the  old  sects,  let  us  be cautious that we form not a new one. This may be done by either adding to, or subtracting from, the apostolic constitution a single item.  Our  platform  must  be  as  long  and  as  broad  as  the  New Testament.  Every  person  that  the  Apostles  would  receive,  if present, we must receive; and therefore the one faith, one Lord, one baptism, one hope, one body, one Spirit, one God and Father of all, must be made the reason of one, and only one table. 

Factionists,  or  opinionists,  or  those  who  seek  to  attach  men  to themselves,  because  of  their  opinions  or  talents,  or  personal accidents, whatever they may be, are to be regarded as the very roots of bitterness in the Christian church — as seeking their own interests, honors, and profits, and not the things of Jesus Christ. By such spirits as these the ancient schisms and sects began; and by kindred spirits, of which every generation can furnish its proper ratios, they are kept alive. All such persons have not the power of effecting much; but now and then arises and succeeds in drawing away disciples after him. We can suggest no better remedies or preventives than those commanded by the Apostles. Let us hold fast their traditions; contend only for the faith; allow differences of opinion; suffer no dogmatists; countenance none of the disciples of Diotrephes; and walk by love, guided by that wisdom which is "first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy to be persuaded, full of mercy  and  of  good  fruits,  without  partiality  and  without hypocrisy." 

From the preceding inductions, it will appear, we presume, very evident to all, that we need neither telescopes nor microscopes to detect *heresies* in the New Testament sense of that word. They are neither more nor less than sects — plain, palpable sects and parties. Every party in Christendom, without respect to any of its tenets, opinions, or practices, is a *heresy,* a schism — unless there be such a party as stands exactly upon the Apostles' ground. Then, in that case, it is a sect just in the sense of the old sect of the Nazarenes, afterwards called *Christians,* and all others are guilty before the Lord, and must be condemned for their opposition to Christ's own party; whose party we are, provided we hold fast all, and only all apostolic traditions, and build upon the Bible, the whole Bible, and nothing but the Bible. 
