1. Regeneration 
- I create New Heavens and a New 

`  `Isa 65:18. Earth." 

- Behold, I make all things new."   Rev. 21:5. 

` `We  intend  an  essay  of  "the  seeds  of  things."  The  topic  is  a common one, a familiar one, and yet an interesting one. Much has been said, much has been written upon it; and yet it is no better understood than it ought to be. Few give themselves the trouble of thinking much on the things which they think they understand; and many would rather follow the thoughts of others, than think for themselves. Suspense is painful, much study is a weariness of the flesh; and, therefore, the majority are content with the views and opinions handed to them from those who have gone before. 

We  wish  to  treat  this  subject  as  if  it  were  a  new  one;  and  to examine it now, as if we had never examined it before. It is worthy of it. Generation is full of wonders, for it is full of God's physical grandeur;  yet  regeneration  is  still  more  admirable,  for  in  it  the moral attributes of Jehovah are displayed. But  we aim not  at a development of its wonders, but at a plain common sense scriptural exposition of its import. 

We  have  not  learned  our  theology  from  Athanasius,  nor  our morality from Seneca; and, therefore, we shall not call upon them for  illustration,  argument,  or  proof.  To  the  Sacred  Records,  in which alone Christianity yet remains in all its freshness, we look for light; and thither would we direct the eyes of the readers. It is not the regeneration of the schools in which Christianity has been lowered, misapprehended, obscured, and adulterated, of which we are to write; but that regeneration of which Jesus spoke, and the Apostles wrote. 

A  few  things  must  be  premised — a  few  general  views expressed — before we, or our readers, are prepared for the more minute details: and to approach the subject with all unceremonious despatch, we observe, that —  

Man unregenerate is ruined in body, soul, and spirit; a frail and mortal  creature.  From  Adam  his  father  he  inherits  a  shattered constitution. He is the child of a fallen progenitor; a scion from a degenerate stock. 

Superior to Adam, the exile from Eden, in physical, intellectual, and moral nature, none of his descendants can rise. It is not in nature to improve itself; for above its fountain the stream cannot rise.  Cain,  the  first  born  of  Eve,  was  in  nature  the  image  and likeness of him that begat him. Education failed to improve him, while Abel, his  younger brother, obtained the excellency which faith in God's promise alone bestows. The first born, it will be conceded, was at least equal to his younger brother: and who can plead that in nature he excels Eve's eldest son! 

Man  in  his  ruins  is,  however,  a  proper  subject  of  a  remedial system. He is susceptible of renovation. Therefore God has placed him under a regenerating economy. This economy contemplates the regeneration of the whole human constitution, and proposes as its consummation the transformation of spirit, soul, and body. The destiny of the regenerate is described by Paul in one sentence: "As we now bear the image of the earthly Adam, we shall then bear the image of the heavenly Adam." 

God's  own  Son  is  proposed  as  a  model.  Conformity  to  him  in glory, honor, and immortality, as the perfection of the regenerate, is the predestination of him who speaks of things that are not, as though they were. 

Regeneration is, therefore, moral and physical: or, in other words, there is now a renovation of the mind — of the understanding, will, and  affections; — and  there  will  hereafter  be  a  renovation  of  the body: "For this corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal body shall put on immortality." 

The renovation of the mind and character is, therefore, that moral regeneration  which  is  to  be  effected  in  this  life;  for  which  the remedial system, or kingdom of heaven, was set up on earth; and this, therefore, first of all, demands our attention. 

Before we attempt an answer in detail to the question, *How is this moral regeneration effected?* we shall attend to the principle on which the whole remedial system proceeds. The grand principle, or means  which  God  has  adopted  for  the  accomplishment  of  this moral regeneration, is the full demonstration and proof of a single proposition  addressed  to  the  reason  of  man.  This  sublime proposition is, **that** **God is love**. 

The reason and  wisdom of this  procedure will  suggest  itself to every  one,  who  can  understand  the  views  and  feelings  of  all unregenerated  man.  Man  in  a  state  of  alienation  and  rebellion, naturally suspects, that if he be a sinner, and if God hate sin, he must hate him. As love begets love; so hatred begets hatred; and if a sinner suspects that God hates him, he cannot love God. He must know that God loves him, before he can begin to love God. "We," says  an  Apostle,  "love  God  because  he  first  loved  us." — While alienated  in  heart,  through  the  native  darkness  of  his understanding, the sinner misinterprets every restraint which God has placed in his way to prevent his total ruin, as indications of the wrath  of  Heaven.  His  transgression  of  these  restraints,  and  his consciousness of having defied the veracity and power of God, only increase his enmity, and urge him onward to his apostasy and wanderings  from  his  Creator.  The  goodness  of  God  being misunderstood, furnishes to  him  no incentive to repentance and reformation. Guilt, and fear, and shame, the fruits of his apostasy, becloud  his  understanding,  and  veil  from  his  eyes  all  the demonstrations  of  benevolence  and  goodness,  with  which  the creation abounds. Adam under a tree, hiding from God, trembling with fear, suspicious of the movements of every leaf, and covered with shame as a garment, is both an illustration and proof of these views of the state of mind, which obtains in the unregenerate. 

Neither the volume of creation, nor that of God's providence, is sufficient to remove from the natural man these misconceptions and the consequent alienation of heart. The best proof that these two volumes cannot do this, is, that they never have, in any one instance, yet done it. From the nature of things it is indeed evident that they cannot do it. The elements are too often at war with the happiness of man. The ever changing attitude of the natural world in  reference  to  health,  and  life,  and  comfort,  render  it  at  best doubtful, whether the laws of nature, which ultimately bring man down to the grave, are the effect of benevolence, or of malevolence towards mankind. A third volume explanatory of both, and replete also  with  supernatural  developments,  is  wanting,  to  furnish  the most diligent student of nature and providence, with the means of learning the true and full character of him, against whom we have rebelled. 

That volume is the Bible. Holy Prophets and Apostles spake as they were moved by the Spirit of Knowledge and Revelation. Its records,  its  history,  it  prophecy,  its  precepts,  its  laws,  its ordinances, and its examples, all develop and reveal God to man, and man to himself. 

But it is in the person and mission of the **Incarnate** **Word**, that we learn that *God is love.* That God gave his Son for us, and yet gives his Spirit to us — and this gives us himself — are the mysterious and transcendent proofs of the most august proposition in the universe. The gospel, Heaven's  wisdom and power combined, God's own expedient for the renovation of human nature, is neither more nor less, than the illustration and proof of this regenerating proposition. 

Thus  we  hasten  to  our  subject.  Having  glanced  at  the  great landmarks of the plantations of nature and grace, now that we may, in the light of truth, ascertain the true and heaven-taught doctrine of regeneration, we shall cautiously survey the whole process, as developed by the commissioned teachers of the deep counsels of the only true God. 

The  certain  things,  parts  of  this  great  progress,  may  be  well understood, certain terms, which are wont to use to represent them, must be well defined, and accurately apprehended. These terms are *Fact,  Testimony,  Faith,  Repentance,  Reformation,  Bath  of Regeneration, New Birth, Renewing of the Holy Spirit, Newness of Life.*1 

"All things are of God" in the regeneration of man, is our motto; because our Apostle affirmed this as a cardinal truth. He is the author of the *facts* and of the *testimony* which declares them; and being  the  author  of  these,  he  is  the  author  of  all  the  effects produced by these facts. The Christian is a new *creation,* of which God is the *Creator.* The change of heart and of character, which constitute moral regeneration, is the legitimate impression of the facts, or things which God has wrought. The facts constitute the moral  seal  which  stamps  the  image  of  God  upon  man.  In  the natural order, we must place them first, and, therefore, we must first define the term.  

***Repentance*** 

Repentance is usually defined "*sorrow for anything that is past;*" and in the religious vocabulary it is simply "*sorrow for sin.*" This is one, but it is only one of the natural effects of the belief of the testimony  of  God.  The  gospel  facts,  testimony,  and  faith, contemplate more than this. But yet it is necessary that this point of faith should be distinctly apprehended, especially in this age, when it occupies so large a space in the systems of theology. 

Repentance,  in  our  current  acceptation,  is  sorrow  for  sin;  and certainly there is no man who believes the revealed facts found in the  testimony  of  God,  who  will  not  be  sorry  for  his  sins.  But simple sorrow for the past, is but a feeling of the heart; which, unless it excite to reformation or the abandonment of sin, is of no more use than the regrets of Judas after he had sold his Master for fifteen dollars. Repentance must, however, precede reformation; for unless we are sorry for the past, and grieved with ourselves, we will  not  think  of  a  change  of  conduct.  Repentance  is  to reformation,  what  motive  is  to  action,  or  resolution  to  any undertaking. It was well for David to resolve to build the temple; and  so  it  is  well  to  form  any  good  design;  but  much  better  to execute  it.  To  feel  sorry  for  the  poor  and  the  afflicted,  and  to resolve to assist and comfort them, is well; but to go and do it is better:  and,  indeed  unless  our  sorrow  for  the  past,  terminate  in reformation for the future, it is useless in the estimation of heaven and earth; as useless as to say to the hungry, Be filled; or to the naked, Be clothed. 

Genuine repentance does not always issue in reformation. Judas was sorrowful even to  death, but could not reform. Many have been so genuinely sorry for their sins, as to become suicides. Speak we  of  "a  godly  sorrow?"  No:  this  is  not  to  be  expected  from unconverted and ungodly persons. Christians, Paul teaches, when they err, may repent with a godly sorrow; but this is not to be expected  from  the  unregenerate,  or  from  those  who  have  not reformed. It is not, then, the genuineness of repentance that is to be appreciated,  unless  by  genuine  repentance  is  meant  more  than simple sorrow for the past — unless by genuine repentance is meant reformation.  Yet  without  sincere  or  unfeigned  repentance,  there cannot be real or genuine reformation. 

This leads us to observe, that the only unequivocal evidence of sincere repentance, is the actual redress of the injury done; not only a cessation  from  the sin,  but  a restitution  for the sin,  as far as restitution  can  possibly  be  made.  *No  restitution,  no repentance — provided  restitution  can  be  made.*  And  I  may  be permitted  to  add,  *that without  repentance  and  restitution,  when possible, there can be no remission.* 

The  preachers  of  repentance — of  the  necessity  of  repentance  in order to remission, ought to set this matter fairly and fully before sinners. Do they represent repentance as sorrow for the past, and a determination to reform? How then will the sinner know that he is sorry for his sins against men, or how will the community know that he has repented of such sins, unless full restitution was made? It is impossible that either the sinner himself, or the community who know his sins against man, can have any certain evidence that he is penitent, unless by making all possible restitution. 

Peccator wounded the reputation of his neighbor Hermas, and on another  occasion  defrauded  him  of  ten  pounds. — Some  of  the neighborhood were apprised that he had done both. Peccator was converted under the preaching of Paulinus, and, on giving in  a relation  of  his  sorrow  for  his  sins,  spoke  of  the  depth  of  his convictions, and of his abhorrence of his transgression. He was received into the congregation, and sat down with the faithful to commemorate  the  great  sin  offering.  Hermas  and  his  neighbors were witnesses of all this. They saw that Peccator was penitent, and much reformed in his behavior; but they could not believe him sincere, because he had made no restitution. They regarded him either as a hypocrite or self-deceived; because, having it in  his power, he repaid  not  the ten pounds,  nor once contradicted the slanders  he  had  propagated.  Peccator,  however,  felt  little enjoyment in his profession, and soon fell back into his former habits. He became again penitent, and on examining the grounds of his falling off, discovered that he had never cordially turned away from his sins. Overwhelmed in sorrow for the past, he resolved on giving himself up to the Lord; and, reflecting on his past life, set about the work of reformation in earnest. He called on Hermas, paid him his ten pounds, and the interest for every day he had kept it back, went to all the persons to whom he had slandered him, told them what injustice he had done him, and begged them, if they had told it to any other persons, to contradict it. Several other persons whom he had wronged in his dealings with them, he also visited; and fully redressed all these wrongs against his neighbors. He also confessed  them  to  the  Lord,  and  asked  him  to  forgive  him. Peccator  was  then  restored  to  the  church;  and  better  still,  he enjoyed a peace of mind, and a confidence in God, which was a continual feast. His example, moreover, did more to enlarge the congregation at the Cross-roads, than did the preaching of Paulinus in a whole year. This was, unequivocally, *sincere* repentance. 

This is the repentance which Moses preached, and which Jesus approbated.  Under  the  law,  confession  to  the  priest,  and  the presenting of a trespass offering, availed nothing to forgiveness without restitution. But the law went into details still more minute than these; for provision is made for the case in which the sinner could not find the person against whom he had sinned. In such a case, the penitent sinner was to seek out the kindred of the injured party, and if he could find any kinsman, he was to recompense this kinsman; but if he could not find a kinsman, he must recompense it to the Lord, besides offering his trespass offering. It was to go into the Lord's treasury.2 The principle uniformly, in all cases of sin 

against man, was, the sinner "shall make amends for the harm he has done, and shall add the fifth part thereto."3 

If  any  one  suppose  that  repentance  is  to  be  less  sincere  or unequivocal  under  the  gospel,  let  him  remember  that  Zaccheus proposed more than adding a fifth; he would restore fourfold, and that Jesus approbated him for so doing. Indeed, John the Immerser demanded fruits worthy of repentance or of reformation, and Paul proclaimed that those who turned to God should do works meet for, or worthy of, repentance.4 

"Works,  worthy  of  repentance,"  is  a  phrase  which  can  be understood in no other sense than those works which make amends for the harm done to men and the dishonor done to God, as far as both are possible. Can any man think that he is sorry for that sin or wrong  which  he  has  done,  when  he  makes  no  effort  to  make amends to him who was injured in person, character, or property, by it? Works worthy of his professed repentance are wanting, so long as any being whom he has injured in person, property, or reputation, is unredressed to the utmost extent of his ability. 

One  of  our  most  popular  commentators  says — and  with  much truth — "No  man  should  expect  mercy  at  the  hand  of  God,  who having wronged his neighbor, refuses, when he has it in his power, to  make  *restitution.*  Were  he  to  weep  tears  of  blood,  both  the justice and mercy of God would shut out his prayer, if he make not his  neighbor  amends  for  the  injury  he  has  done  him.  He  is  a dishonest man, who illegally holds the property of another in his hands."5 

Every preacher of repentance should insist upon these evidences of sincerity both for the satisfaction of the penitent himself, and for the  good  of  the  community.  "Many  that  believed  came  and confessed, and showed their deeds; many of them also, who used curious arts, bringing their books together, burnt them before all; and they computed the value of them and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver."6 This was making restitution, in their case, as far as possible; and the principle here evinced is applicable in every other case. 

But  in  pursuing  this  subject  so  far,  we  have  passed  over  the boundaries  of  repentance,  and  sometimes  confounded  it  with reformation. This is owing to the licentious use of language, to which  modern  theology  has  so  richly  contributed.  We  shall, however,  redress  this  wrong,  as  far  as  practicable,  by  a  few remarks on 

***Reformation*** 

The word *metanoia,* used by the sacred writers and heaven-taught preachers of the New Economy, as indicative of the first effect of faith, as has been often showed, is different from that which our word *repentance* fitly represents. It literally imports *a change of mind;* but, as Parkhurst, Campbell, and many others say, "such a change of mind as influences one's subsequent behavior for the better." "It has been observed by some, and, I think with reason, that the former (*matanoeo*) denotes properly a change to the better: the latter (*matamelomai*) barely a change, whether to the better or to  the  worse;  that  the  former  marks  a  change  of  mind  that  is durable, and produces consequences; the latter expresses only a present  uneasy  feeling  of  regret,  without  regard  to  duration  or effects:  in  fine,  that  the  first  may  be  translated  into  English,  *I reform;*  the  second,  *I  repent,*  in  the  familiar  acceptation  of  the words." Now as every one who reforms *repents;* but as every one who  repents  does  *not  reform,*  this  distinction  is  necessary  and proper; and there is nothing hazarded, nothing lost by translating the former *I reform,* and the latter *I repent.* There is something gained, especially in  all places  where we have the word in  the imperative  mood,  because  then  it  is  of  importance  to  know precisely what is intended. If we are commanded only to change our mind, or to be sorry for the past, we have obeyed when we feel regret; but if more than mere change of mind or regret is intended, we have not obeyed the commandment until we change for the better. Now it is, we think, very evident from various passages of the sacred writings of the Apostles, and from their speeches, that they commanded more than a simple change of mind as respected past conduct, or mere sorrow for the past. Peter commanded the thousands assembled on the day of Pentecost, who had changed their  minds,  and  who were  sorry  for  the  past,  to  do  something which they had not yet done; and that something is in the common version rendered *repent;* and in the new version, *reform;* and in the old English Bible, *amend your lives.* The word here used is the imperative of *metanoeo.* Judas repented, and many like him, who never  reformed;  and,  therefore,  it  is  of  importance  that  this distinction should be kept in view."7 

Repentance is not reformation, but it is necessary to it; for whoever reforms must first repent. Reformation is, indeed, the carrying out of the purpose into our conduct. But as reformation belongs rather to  another  part  of  our  essay  than  the  present,  we  shall,  on  the premises already before us, pause and offer a few reflections. 

In the preceding definition of words and ideas, it would appear that we  have  a  literal  and  unfigurative  representation  of  the  whole process of what is figuratively called *regeneration.* For, as we shall soon see, the term *regeneration* is a figure of speech which very appropriately, though analogically, represents the reformation or renovation of life of which we have now spoken. 

That the preceding arrangement is not arbitrary, but natural and necessary, the reader will perceive, when he reflects, that the thing done, or the fact, must precede the report or testimony concerning it; that the testimony concerning it must precede the belief of it; that  belief  of  the  testimony  must  precede  any  feeling  in correspondence  with  the  fact  testified;  and  that  feeling  must precede action in conformity to it. Fact, testimony, faith, feeling, action,  are  therefore  bound  together  by  a  natural  and  gracious necessity, which no ingenuity  can separate.  And will not  every Christian say, that when a person *feels* and *acts* according to the faith,  or  the  testimony  of  God,  he  is  a  new creature — regenerate — truly converted to God? He that believes the facts  testified  in  the  record  of  God,  understands  them,  feels according to their nature and meaning, and acts in correspondence with  them — has  undergone  a  change  of  heart  and  of  life  which makes him a new man. 

This is that moral change of heart and life, which is figuratively called  *regeneration.*  We are not  to  suppose that  regeneration is something which must be added to the faith, the feeling, and the action or behavior, which are the effects of the testimony of God understood and embraced; or which are the impress of the divine facts attested by Prophets and Apostles. It is only another name for the same process in all its parts. 

It may also be observed that numerous figures and analogies are used by the inspired writers to set forth this change, as well as other leading truths and lessons in the Bible. In their collective capacity, Christians are called a kingdom, a nation, a generation, a family, a house, a flock, a city, a temple, a priesthood, etc. In their individual capacity they are called kings, priests, soldiers, citizens, children, sheep, branches, stones, etc. They are said to be begotten, born, regenerated, builded, engrafted, converted, created, planted. Now,  under  whatever  figure  they  are  considered  or  introduced, reason argues that everything said of them should be expressed in conformity with the figure under which they are presented. Are they  called  *sheep?* — then  he  that  presides  over  them  is  called  a *Shepherd;* their enemies are *wolves* and *dogs;* their sustenance is the *green pasture;* their place of safety and repose, the *sheepfold;* their  errors  are  *wanderings*  and  *strayings;*  their  conversion,  a *return;*  and  their  good  behavior  a  *hearing  of  the  voice,*  or  a *following,*  of  the  Shepherd.  Are  they  called  *children?* — then collectively they are a *family;* they are *begotten* and *born again;* God is their *Father;* their separation is an *adoption;* Jesus is their *elder brother;* they are *heirs* of God; they *live* and *walk* with God. Are  they  *priests?* — Jesus  is  their  *High  Priest;*  the  church  their *temple;*  the  Savior  is  their  *altar;*  their  songs,  their  praises,  are *incense* ascending to heaven; and their oblations to the poor, their works of love, are  *sacrifices* most acceptable to  God. Are they called  *citizens?* — the  church  is  then  *the  kingdom  of  heaven; Jerusalem is the mother of them all;* formerly they were *aliens,* and 

their  naturalization  is  *regeneration.*  Are  they  called *branches?* — then Jesus is the *true vine;* his Father the *vine dresser;* their union with Christ, an *engrafting;* the discipline of the gospel, a *pruning;* and their good works are *fruits of righteousness.* 

Thus  there  is  no  confusion  of  metaphor  in  the  Scriptures  of truth — in the dialect of heaven.  It is the language of Ashdod; it belongs  to  the  confusion  of  Babel,  to  mingle  and  confound  all figures and analogies. Hence are so often hear of *being born again,* without any allusion to a family or a kingdom! and of *regeneration* as antecedent to faith or repentance! Had a modern assembly of Divines been employed to accommodate the scripture style to their orthodox sentiments, we should not have had to read all the Old Testament and all the historic books of the New, to find the subject of regeneration but once proposed to an alien, as the fact is; but then we should have found it in the history of Abel, of Enoch, of Noah, and of Abraham, if not in every section of the law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. John the Baptist, Jesus, and the Holy Twelve, would have had it in every sermon; and truth faith would have been always defined as the fruit of regeneration. 

But Jesus had a *kingdom* in his eye and in his discourse before he ever mentioned being 'born again' to Nicodemus; for unless there was a family, a state, or a kingdom to be born into, it is impossible for any one to be born into it. And if the kingdom of heaven only began to be after Jesus entered into heaven; or, if it is was only approaching from the ministry of John to the day of Pentecost, then it would have been preposterous indeed — an incongruity of which no inspired man was every guilty — to call any change of heart or life, *a regeneration,* or *a new birth.* It is true that good men in all ages were made such by facts, testimony, faith, and feeling, by a change of heart, by the Spirit of God; but the *analogy* or *figure* of being *born,* or of being *regenerated,* only began to be preached, and when men began to press into it. 

We are now, perhaps, better prepared to consider the proper import and  meaning  of  '*regeneration*'  in  general,  and  of  '*the  bath  of regeneration*' in particular. 

***Regeneration*** 

This word is found but twice in all the oracles of God — once in Matt.  19:28.  and  once  in  Titus  3:5.  In  the  former  it  is  almost universally  understood  to  mean  *a  new  state  of  things,*  not  of *persons* — a peculiar era, in which all things are made new: — such as the formation  of  a new  church on the day of  Pentecost,  or the commencement of the Millennium, or the general resurrection. The biblical critics of eminence have assigned it to one or other of these great changes in the state of things. So we use the word *revolution,* and the phrase *the Revolution,* to express a change in the political state of things. The most approved punctuation and version of this passage renders it altogether evident that a new era is alluded to. 'Jesus answered, Indeed, I say to you, that at the renovation when the Son of Man shall be seated on his glorious throne, you, my followers, sitting also upon twelve thrones, shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel.' This being so evident, and so often alluded to in our former writings, we shall proceed to the remaining occurrence, Titus 3:5. 

All the new light which we propose to throw on this passage will be gathered from an examination of the acceptation of the word *generation* in the sacred writings. Our reason for this is, that we object to a peremptory decision of the meaning of a word which occurs only in the passage under discussion, from our reasonings upon the isolated passages in which it is found. In such a case, if we cannot find the whole word in any parallel passages, the proper substitute is the root or branches of that word, so far as they are employed  by  the  same  writers.  Moreover,  we  think  it  will  be granted, that, whatever may be the scriptural  acceptation of the word *generation,* regeneration is only the repetition of that act or process. 

After  a  close  examination  of  the  passages  in  which  *generation* occurs in the writings of the Hebrew Prophets and Apostles, we find it used only in two acceptations — as descriptive of the whole process of creation and of the thing created. A race of man, or a particular  class  of  men,  is  called  a  *generation;*  but  this  is  its figurative, rather than its literal meaning. Its literal meaning is the formation or creation of anything. Thus it is first used in the Holy Scriptures. Moses calls the creation, or whole process of formation of the heavens and the earth, 'The *generations* of the heavens and the earth.'8 The account of the formation of Adam and Eve, and 

also the account of the creations of Adam and Eve, are, by the same  writer,  called  'The  book  or  record  of  the  *generations*  of Adam.'9  This  is  the  literal  import  of  the  word;  consequently, *regeneration* literally indicates the whole process of renovating or new-creating man. 

This process may consist of numerous distinct acts; but it is in accordance  with  the  general  usage  to  give  to  the  beginning,  or consummating act, the name of the whole process. For the most part,  however,  the  name  of  the  whole  process  is  given  to  the consummating  act,  because  the  process  is  always  supposed incomplete until that act is performed. For example: In the process of tanning, fulling, forging, etc. the subject of these operations is not  supposed  to  be  tanned,  fulled,  forged,  until  the  last  act  is performed.  So  in  all  the  processes  of  nature — in  the  animal, vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms,  the  last  act  consummates  the process.  To  all  acquainted  with  the  process  of  animalization, germination,  crystallization,  etc.  no  farther  argument  is  needed. But in the style of our American husbandmen, no crop nor animal is *made,* until it come to maturity. We often hear them say of a good shower, or a few clear days, "This is the *making* of the wheat or  corn."  In  the  same  sense  it  is,  that  most  Christians  call *regeneration* **the new birth**; though *being born* is only the last act in natural generation, and the last act in regeneration. 

In  this  way  the  *new  birth*  and  *regeneration*  are  used indiscriminately by commentators and writers on theology, and by a figure of speech, it is justified on well established principles of rhetoric. This leads us to speak particularly of (the next chapter) 

