4. Physical Regeneration ****

Our mortal bodies are yet to feel the regenerating power of the son of God. This is emphatically called '*the glory of his power.*' 'The redemption of the body' from the bondage of corruption, is the consummation  of  the  new  creating  energy  of  him  who  has immortality. Life and incorruptibility were displayed in and by his resurrection from the dead. It was great to create man in the image of God — greater to redeem his soul from general corruption; but greater  of  all,  to  give  to  his  mortal  frame  incorruptible  and immortal  vigor. The power displayed in  the  giving to  the dead body of the Son of God incorruptible glory and endless life, is set forth by the Apostle Paul, as incomparably surpassing every other divine work within the reach of human knowledge. He prays that the mind of Christians may be enlarged to apprehend this mighty power — that the Father of glory would open their minds, 'that they might know the exceeding greatness of his power in relation to us who believe — according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places.' Faith in this wonderful operation of God — hope for the riches of the glory of the inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  are  in  the  most  powerful principles of action,  which God has  ever planted in  the human breast. This is the transcendent hope of the Christian calling, which imparted such heroic courage to all the saints of eternal renown. This  better resurrection in  prospect,  has produced heroes which make cowards of all the boasted chiefs of worldly glory. As the magnetic needle ever points to the pole, so the mind, influenced by this hope, ever rises to the skies, and terminates in the fulness of joy, and the pleasures for evermore, in the presence and at the right hand of God. 

To raise a dead body to life again, is not set forth as more glorious, than by a touch to give new vigor to the palsied arm, to impart sight to the blind, or hearing to the deaf; but to give that raised body  the  deathless  vigor  of  incorruptibility,  to  renovate  and transform it in all its parts, and to make every spirit feel that it reanimates its own body, that it is as insusceptible of decay, as immortal as the Father of eternity, is a thought overwhelming to every mind, a development which will glorify the power of God, as the  sacrifice  of  his  Son  now  displays  his  righteousness, faithfulness, and love to the heavens and to the earth. 

This new birth from the dark prison of the grave, is fitly styled 'the redemption of the body' from bondage, '*the glorious liberty of the sons of God.*' As in our watery grave the old man is figuratively buried to rise no more, so in the literal grave, the prison of the body, we leave all that is corrupt; for he that makes all things new, will  raise  us  up in  his own  likeness,  and  present  us  before  his Father's face in all the glory of immortality. Then will regeneration be complete. Then will be the full revelation of the sons of God. 

Immortality, in the sacred writings, is never applied to the spirit of man. It is not the doctrine of Plato which the resurrection of Jesus proposes. It is the *immortality of the body* of which his resurrection is a proof and pledge. This was never developed till he became the first born from the dead, and in a human body entered the heavens. Jesus was not a spirit when he returned to God. He is not made the Head of the New Creation as a Spirit, but as the Son of Man. Our nature  in  his  person  is  glorified;  and  when  he  appears  to  our salvation, we shall be made like him: we shall see him as he is. This is the Christian hope. 

- A hope so great and so divine  

`  `May trials well endure,  

`  `And purge the soul from sense and sin,    As Christ himself is pure."  

` `Thus matters stand in the economy of redemption. Thus the divine scheme of regeneration is consummated: the moral part, by the operation of moral means; the physical part, by the mighty power of  God  operating  through  physical  means.  By  the  word  of  his power he created the heavens and the earth; by the word of his grace he reanimates the soul of man; and by the word of his power he will again form our bodies anew, and reunite the spirit and the body in the bonds of an incorruptible and everlasting union. Then shall death  "be swallowed up forever" "*Where now thy victory, boasting grave?*" But for this we must wait. 'We know not what we shall be.' We only know, that when he appears, we shall be like him; that we shall see him as he is.  

