8. A Word to the Moral Regenerators of Any Age ****

   God, our heavenly Father, works by means, as we all confess. His means are wisely adapted to the ends he has in view. His agents are the best agents for the work he has to accomplish. He employs not physical means nor agents, for moral ends and purposes. Nor does he produce physical effects, by moral means and agents. He has been  pleased  to  employ  not  angels,  but  men  in  the  work  of regenerating the world. Men have written, printed, and published the gospel for nearly two thousand years. They have perpetuated it from  generation  to  generation.  They  have  translated  it  from language to language, and carried it from country to country. They have preached it in word and in deed, and thus it has come down to our days. 

During  the  present  administration  of  the  reign  of  Heaven,  no change is to be expected; no new mission is to be originated, no new order of preachers is to be instituted. The King has gone to a far  country;  and  before  his  departure,  he  called  together  his servants, and committed to them the management of his estate till he  return.  He  has  not  yet  come  to  reckon  them.  They  were commanded first to proclaim the doctrine of his reign; then to write it in a book, and to commit it to faithful men, who should be able to teach it correctly to others. By these faithful men the records have been kept; and through their vigilance and industry they have been  guarded  from  corruption,  interpolation,  and  change.  One generation  handed  them  over  to  the  next;  and  if  ignorant  and unfaithful copyists neglected their duty, others more faithful have corrected them; and now we are able to hear the words which Jesus spoke, and to read the very periods penned by the Apostles. 

Thus, whatever the Prophets and the Apostles have achieved since their  death,  has  been  accomplished  by  human  agents  like ourselves. Where men have not carried this intelligence in speech or writing, not one of our race knows God or his anointed Savior. No angel nor Holy Spirit has been sent to the Pagan nations: and God has exerted no power out of his word to enlighten or reclaim savage  nations.  These  indisputable  facts  and  truths  have  much moral meaning, and ought to give a strong impulse to our efforts to regenerate the world. 

The best means of doing this is the object now before us; and this is  one,  the  importance  of  which  cannot  be  easily  exaggerated. There are three ways of proceeding in this case, which now seem to  occupy  a  considerable  share  of  public  attention.  These  are properly called *theorizing, declaiming,* and *preaching;* on each of which we may offer a remark or two in passing. 

The *theorizers* are those who are always speculating upon correct notions, or the true theory of conversion. They are great masters of method, and with some of them it is a ruinous error to place faith before regeneration, or repentance after faith. Heresy, with these, is the derangement of the method, which these have proposed for God to work by in converting the sinner. And the true faith which is connected with salvation, is an apprehension of this theory and acquiescence in it. These are all theorists, heady, or speculative Christians; and with them the whole *scheme* of redemption is a splendid theory. 

Our maxim is, *Theory for the Doctors, and medicine for the sick.* Doctors fatten on theories, but patients die who depend on theory for cure. A few grains of practice is worth a pound of theory. The mason  and  the  carpenter  *build*  the  house  by  *rule;*  but  he  that inhabits it, *lives* by *eating* and *drinking.* No man ever was cured physically, politically, morally, or religiously, by learning a correct theory of his  physical,  political,  moral,  or religious malady. As soon might we expect to heal an ulcer on the liver by a discourse upon that organ, its functions, its diseases, and their cure, as to restore  a  sinner  by  means  of  the  theory  of  faith,  repentance, regeneration, or effectual calling. But on this enough has already been said, and more than is necessary to convince those who can think, and who dare to reason on such themes. 

The  *declaimers*  are  not  those  only  who  eulogize  virtue  and reprobate vice; but that large and respectable class who address themselves to the passions, to the hopes and fears of men. They are those who are so rhetorical upon the joys of heaven, and the terrors of hell:  who horrify, terrify, and  allure by the strength  of their descriptions,  the  flexions  of  their  voices,  the  violence  of  their gestures,  and  their  touching  anecdotes.  Their  hearers  are  either dissolved in tears, or frantic with terror. These talk much about the heart; and, on their theory, if man's heart was extracted, all his religion would be extracted with it. The religion of their converts flows in their blood, and has its foundation in their passions. 

The *preachers,* properly so called, first address themselves to the understanding,  by  a  declaration  or  narrative  of  the  wonderful works of God. They state, illustrate, and prove the great facts of the  gospel;  they  lay  the  whole  record  before  their  hearers;  and when they have testified what God has done, what he has promised and threatened, they exhort their hearers on these premises, and persuade them to obey the gospel, to surrender themselves to the guidance  and  direction  of  the  Son  of  God.  They  address themselves  to  the  whole  man,  his  understanding,  will,  and affections,  and  approach  the  heart  by  taking  the  citadel  of  the understanding. 

The accomplished and wise proclaimer of the word will find it always expedient to address his audience in their proper character; to approach them through their prejudices, and never to find fault with these prepossessions, which are not directly opposed to the import and design of the ministry of reconciliation. He will set before them the models found in the sacred history, which show that the same discourse is not to be preached in every place and to every assembly, even when it is necessary to proclaim the same gospel. Paul's address to the Athenians, Lycaonians, Antiochians, to Felix, the Jailor, and king Agrippa, are full of instruction on the topic. 

Augustine  has  written  a  treatise  on  preaching,  which  Luther proposed to himself as a model; but it is said that Augustine fell as far short of his own precepts, as did any of his contemporaries. We all can with more facility give precepts to others, than conform to them  ourselves.  In  Augustine's  treatise,  which  in  some  respects influenced and formed the style and plan of Luther, and through him all the Protestants, there is much said on the best rhetorical mode "of exhibiting the truth to others;" but it savors more of the art  of  the  schoolmen,  than  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Apostles.  He labors more on the best style and mode of expressing one's self, than on the things to be said. 

Our best precepts in this matter are derived rather from the books of Deuteronomy and Nehemiah, than from any other source out of the New Testament. The book of Deuteronomy may be regarded as a series of sermons or discourses, delivered to the Jews by their great teacher, Moses, rather than as a part of the Jewish history. Two things in this book deserve great attention. The first is the simplicity,  fulness,  and  particularity  of  his  narratives  of  the incidents on the journey through the wilderness; — God's doings and theirs, for the last forty years, are faithfully and intelligibly laid before  them.  The  next  is  the  use  made  of  these  facts;  the conclusions deduced, the arguments drawn, and the exhortations tendered from these facts. For a fair and beautiful specimen of this, let  the  curious  reader  take  up  and  carefully  read  the  first  four chapters of the book of Deuteronomy. The fact and the application, the  argument  and  the  exhortation  after  the  manner  of  Moses, cannot fail to instruct him. 

The writings of the scribes during the captivity, teach us how to address a people that have lost the true meaning of the oracles of God. The readings, expositions, exhortations, and prayers of Ezra and Nehemiah, are full of instruction to Christians in these days of Babylonish  captivity.  To  address  a  people  long  accustomed  to hearing  the  Scriptures,  yet  ignorant  of  them,  and  consequently disobedient, is a matter that requires all the wisdom and prudence which can be acquired from Jewish and Christian records. 

The manner of address, next to the matter of it, is most important. The  weightiest  arguments,  the  most  solemn  appeals,  the  most pathetic expostulations, if not sustained by the gravity, sincerity, and piety of the speaker, will be like water spilled upon the ground. A little levity, a few witticisms, a sarcastic air, a conceited attitude, or a harsh expression, will often neutralize all the excellencies of the  most  scriptural  and  edifying  discourse.  The  great  work  of regenerating men is too solemn, too awfully grave and divine, to allow anything of the sort. Humility, serenity, devotion, and all benevolence in aspect, as well as in language, are essential to a successful proclamation of the great facts of the Living Oracles. He that can smile in his discourse at the follies, need not weep over the  misfortunes,  of  the  ignorant  and  superstitious.  He  that  can, while preaching the gospel, deride and ridicule the errors of his fellow professors, is, for the time being, disqualified to persuade them  to  accept  of  truth,  or  gladly  to  receive  the  message  of salvation. 

Those  preachers  have  been  sadly  mistaken,  who  have  sought popularity  by  the  eccentricities,  and  courted  smiles  rather  than souls; — who,  by  their  anecdotes  and  foolish  jests,  told  with  the Bible  before  them,  have  thought  to  make  themselves  useful  by making themselves ridiculous — and to regenerate men by teaching them how to violate the precepts of the gospel, and to disdain the examples of the Great Teacher and his Apostles. 

It will not do. These are the weapons of this world, and no part of the armor of light. Jesus and his Apostles never sanctioned, by precept  or  example,  such  a  course;  and  it  is  condemned  by  all sensible men, whether Jews or Gentiles, professors or profane.  

In attempting to regenerate men, we must place before them the new  man,  not  the  old  man,  in  the  preacher  as  well  as  in  the discourse; and while we seek out arguments to convince and allure them, we must show them in our speech and behavior, that we believe what we preach. So did the Apostles and Evangelists. They commended themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of Jesus Christ. 

Error must be attacked. It must be opposed by the truth. But it may be asked, whether the darkness may not be more easily dissipated by the introduction of light, than by elaborate discourses upon its nature and attributes. So with moral darkness, or error. To dissipate it most effectually, the easiest and readiest way is to introduce the light of truth. No preacher is obliged to learn all the errors of all ages, that he may be able to oppose them; nor is the congregation enlightened in the knowledge of God by such expositions of error. Present opposing errors may require attention; but, to attack these most  successfully,  it  is  only  necessary  to  enforce  the  opposing truths. 

This  is  a very  grave subject,  and requires very grave  attention. Much  depends  upon  a  rational  and  scriptural  decision  of  the question, *Which is the most effectual way to oppose and destroy error?* To aid us in such an inquiry, it is necessary to examine how the Prophets and Apostles opposed the errors of their times. The world was as full of error in those days as it has ever been since. The idolatries of the Pagan world, and the various doctrines of the sects of philosophers, in and out of the land of Israel, threw as much labor into their hands, as the various heresies of apostate Christendom have thrown into ours. Their general rule was to turn the artillery of light, and to gather into a focus the arrows of day, upon  the  dark  shades  of  any  particular  error.  Their  philosophy was; — The splendors of light most clearly display the blackness of darkness,  and  scatter  it  from  its  presence.  Thus  they  opposed idolatry, superstition, and error of every name. Going forth in the armor of light, as the sun in the morning, the shades of the night retired  from  their  presence,  and  the  cheering  beams  of  day  so gladdened the eyes of their converts, that they loved darkness no more. Let us go and do likewise. 

An  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  the  best apparatus for the work of regenerating men. The best piece I have found in the celebrated treatise of Augustine on preaching is the following: —   

"He, then, who handles and teaches the word of God, should be a defender  of  the  true  faith,  and  a  vanquisher  of  error;  and  in accomplishing this, the object of preaching, he should conciliate the adverse, excite the remiss, and point out to the ignorant their duty and future prospects. When, however, he finds his audience favorably disposed, attentive, and docile, or succeeds in rendering them so, then other things are to be done, as the case may require. If they are to be instructed, then, to make them acquainted with the subject in question, narration must be employed; and to establish what is doubtful, resort must be had to reasoning and evidence. If they are to be moved rather than instructed, then, to arouse them from  stupor  in  putting  their  knowledge  into  practice,  and  bring them to yield full assent to those things which they confess to be true, there will be need of the higher powers of eloquence; it will be  necessary  to  entreat,  reprove,  excite,  restrain,  and  do whatsoever else may prove effectual in moving the heart. 

"All this, indeed, is what most men constantly do, with respect to those  things  which  they  undertake  to  accomplish  by  speaking. Some,  however,  in  their  way  of  doing  it,  are  blunt,  frigid, inelegant;  others,  ingenious,  ornate,  vehement.  Now  he  who engages in the business of which I am treating, must be able to speak  and  dispute  with  wisdom,  even  if  he  cannot  do  so  with eloquence, in order that he may profit his audience; although he will profit them less in this case, than if he could combine wisdom and  eloquence  together.  He  who  abounds  in  eloquence  without wisdom, is certainly so much the more to be avoided, from the very fact that the hearer is delighted with what it is useless to hear, and  thinks  what  is  said  to  be  true,  because  it  is  spoken  with elegance. Nor did his sentiment escape the notice of those among the ancients, who yet regarded it as important to teach the art of rhetoric; they confessed that wisdom without eloquence profited states but very little, but that eloquence without wisdom profited them not at all, and generally proved highly injurious. If, therefore, those who taught the precepts of eloquence, even though ignorant of the true, that is, the celestial wisdom 'which cometh down from the Father of lights,' were compelled by the instigations of truth to make such a confession, and that too in the very books in which their  principles  were  developed;  are  we  not  under  far  higher obligations to acknowledge the same thing, who are the sons and daughters  of  this  heavenly  wisdom?  Now  a  man  speaks  with greater or less wisdom according to the proficiency he has made in the  sacred  Scriptures.  I  do  not  mean  in  reading  them  and committing them to memory, but in rightly understanding them, and diligently searching into their meaning. There are those who read them and yet neglect them — who read them, to remember the words,  but  neglect  to  understand  them.  To  these,  without  any doubt, those persons are to be preferred, who retaining less the words  of  the  Scriptures,  search  after  their  genuine  signification with the inmost feelings of the heart. But better than both is he, who  can  repeat  them  when  he  pleases,  and  at  the  same  time understands them as they ought to be understood."15

Luther's  favorite  maxim  was,  "*Bonus  Textuarius,  Bonus Theologus;*" or, One well acquainted with the Scriptures makes a good theologian. 

There is one thing, above all others, which must never be lost sight of by him, who devotes himself to the work of regeneration. This all-important consideration is, that the end of the object of all his labors is *to impress the moral image of God upon the moral nature of man.* To draw this image upon the heart, to transform the mind of man into the likeness of God in all moral feeling, is the end proposed in the remedial system. The mould into which the mind of man is to be cast is the Apostles' doctrine; or the seal by which this impression is to be made is the testimony of God. The gospel facts are like so many types, which, when scientifically arranged by  an  accomplished  compositor,  make  a  complete  form,  upon which, when the mind of man is placed by the power which God has given to the preacher, every type makes its full impression upon  the  heart.  There  is  written  upon  the  understanding,  and engraved upon the heart, the will, or law, of character of our Father who is in heaven. 

The Apostles were these accomplished compositors, who gave us a *perfect  'form  of  sound  words.*'  Our  instrumentality  consists  in bringing the minds of men to this form, or impressing it upon their hearts. To do this most effectually, the preacher or evangelist must have the word of Christ dwelling in him richly, in all wisdom; and he  must  'study  to  show  himself  an  approved  workman, irreproachable, rightly dividing the word of truth.' He that is most eloquent and wise in the Holy Scriptures, he who has them most at command,  will  have  the  most  power  with  men;  because  being furnished  with  the  words  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  has  the  very arguments,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  chooses  to  employ  in quickening the dead in converting sinners. For to the efficacy of the living word not only Paul deposes, but James and Peter also bear ample testimony. 'Of his own will he has begotten us, *by the word  of  truth,*  that  we  might  be  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  his creatures.'16 'Having been regenerated, not by corruptible seed, but by  incorruptible,  *through  the  word*  of  the  living  God,  which remains."17 To the fruits of his labors, such a preacher with Paul may say, 'To Jesus Christ, through the gospel, I have regenerated, or begotten you.' 

Thus, in the midst of numerous interruptions, we have attempted to lay  before  the  minds  of  our  readers  the  whole  doctrine  of Regeneration, in all its length and breadth, in the hope, that after a more particular attention to its meaning and value, by the blessing of  God,  they  may  devote  themselves  more  successfully  to  this great work; and not only enjoy more of the Holy Spirit themselves, but be more useful in forwarding the moral regeneration of the world. 

To God our Father, through the great Author of the Christian faith, who has preserved us in health in this day of affliction and great distress, be everlasting thanks for the renewing of our minds by the Holy Spirit, and for the hope of the regeneration of our bodies, of the heavens and of the earth, at the appearance of the Almighty Regenerator, who comes to make all things new! Amen. 

1 For Fact, Testimony and Faith, see pp. 109-121.  

2 Num 5:7-8.  

3 Lev 5:16.  

4 Acts 26:20.  

5 Adam Clarke on Gen 42:1-38 :  

6 Acts 19:18-20.  

7 See Family Testament, Note 39, p. 74.  

8 Gen 2:4.  

9 Gen 5:1.  

10 See Num 8:7. — xix. 9, 13, 20, 21. — xxxi. 23.  

11 Ephesians, chap. 5: 26.  

12 It may again be necessary in this fastidious age, to remark, that in this essay, in order to disabuse the public mind on our use and acceptation of the term *regeneration,* we have taken the widest range, which a supreme regard for the 

apostolic style could, in our judgment, allow. While we argue that the phrase *bath  of  regeneration,*  (  Titus  3:5.)  is  equivalent  to  *immersion,*  as  already explained, and as contradistinguished from the *renewing of the Holy Spirit,* of which the immersed believer is a proper subject; we have spoken of the whole process of renovation, not in the strict application of the phrase, Titus 3:5, but rather in the whole latitude of the figure employed by the Apostle. It is not the first act of begetting, nor the last act of being born, but the whole process of conversion alluded to in the figure of *generation,* to which we have directed the  attention  of  our  readers.  For,  as  often  before  stated,  our  opponents deceive themselves and their hearers, by representing us as ascribing to the word  *immersion,*  and  the  act  of  immersion,  all  that  they  call  *regeneration.* While, therefore, we contend that being 'born again,' and being immersed, are, in  the  Apostle's  style,  two  names  for  the  same  action,  we  are  far  from supposing,  or  teaching,  that  in  forming  the  new  man,  there  is  nothing necessary but to be born.  

`  `If any ask, why this matter was not fully developed in our first essays on this subject, our answer is, Because we could not anticipate, that our opponents would  have  so  represented  or  misrepresented  our  views.  Were  a  General asked, why he did not arrange all his troops in the beginning of the action, as he had them arranged when he triumphed over his enemy, he would reply, That the manoeuvres and assaults of the enemy, directed the disposition of his forces.  

`  `Our opponents contend for a regeneration, begun and perfected, before faith or baptism — a spiritual change of mind by the Holy Spirit, antecedent to either knowledge, faith, or repentance, of which infants are as susceptible as adults; and,  therefore,  as  we  contend,  make  the  gospel  of  no  effect.  By  way  of reprisals, they would have their converts to think, that we go for nothing but water, and sarcastically  call  us the advocates of  "water  regeneration." They think there is something more sublime and divine in "spirit regeneration;" and therefore claim the title of orthodox. This calumny has been one occasion of the present essay, and it has occasioned that part of it, which gives the fullest latitude to the term *regeneration,* which analogy gives to the figure used by the Apostle.  But  when  we  speak  in  the  exact  style  of  the  living  oracles  on  this subject, we must represent *being born again,* ( John 3:5,) and *regeneration,* ( Titus 3:5,) as relating to the act of immersion alone. See *Extra Defended,* pp. 24-36.  

13 *August* 1*st.* —  I have just now opened the CincinnaTim. *Baptist Journal* of 26 July, from which I read an approved definition of regeneration. It is orthodox, 

spiritual, physical, mystical, and metaphysical Regeneration. It is quoted from the " STANDARD." Regeneration, in the *Evangelical Standard,* is thus defined: —   

- Is the sinner active in regeneration? Certainly he is. His mind is a thinking 

rational principle, which never ceases to act; and, therefore, when the word *passive* is applied to it, by Old Divines, or by Calvinists, they do not mean that it is *literally* dead, like inert matter, which requires a physical impulse to put it in motion. They only mean to convey the scriptural idea, that the Holy Spirit is the *sole* agent in regeneration, and that the sinner has no more *efficient agency* in accomplishing it, than Lazarus had in becoming alive from the dead. Still they grant that his mind is most active, but unhappily its activity is all *against* the Divine influence; as the Scriptures assure us, unregenerated persons 'do always resist' the strivings of the Spirit. ' *Every* imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is *only* evil continually.' ' There is none that doeth good, no, *not one.*' The sinner, therefore, instead of voluntarily co-operating with the Holy Spirit, does all he can to *resist* his divine influence, and *prevent* his own regeneration, until he is *made* willing by almighty power."  

`  `What a comfortable thing is this theory of regeneration! The sinners to be regenerated when actively striving against the Divine influence. At the moment of  regeneration,  "he  has,"  in  one  sense,  "no  more  efficient  agency  in accomplishing it, than Lazarus had in becoming alive from the dead;" and in another  sense,  he  is  not  passive,  but  "does  all  he  can  to  *resist*  the  Divine influence,  and  *prevent*  his  own  regeneration,  until  he  is  *made*  willing  by almighty power." This is *standard* divinity; and he that preaches this divinity, is a  pious,  regenerated,  Regular  Orthodox  Baptist  Christian  Minister!  Of  how much value on this theory, is all the preaching in Christendom? The Holy Spirit may be busily at work upon some drunken sot, or some vile debauchee, who is as dead as Lazarus on one side, and on the other resisting the Spirit, with all his moral and physical energy, up to the moment that the Almighty arm pierces him to the heart with a sword, and makes him alive by killing him!!!  

`  `The  absurdity  and  licentiousness  of  such  a  view  of  the  great  work  of renovation, we had thought so glaring, that no editor in the West would have had boldness to have published it. This is a proof of the necessity of our present essay, and will explain to the intelligent reader why we have given to the whole process of renovation, the name of regeneration, which properly belongs to the last act.  

14 Matt. 19:28.  

15 From the Biblical  Repository, p. 574. Translated from the Latin by A. O. Taylor, of Andover, Mass.  

16 James 1:18.  17 1 Pe 1:23.  

