# 3. The New Life

'*Newness of life*' is a Hebraism for a *new life*. The new birth brings us into a new state. 'Old things have passed away; all things have become new,' says an Apostle: 'for if any one be in Christ, he is a new creature.' A new spirit, a new heart, and an outward character, corresponding to this change, are the effects of the regenerating process:  'for  the  end  of  the  change,'  the  grand  results  of  the remedial system, is 'love out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.' 'Love is the fulfilling of the whole law,' and the  fruit  of  the  whole gospel.  It  is  the  cardinal  principle  of  all Christian behavior, the soul of the new man, the breath of the new life. Faith works by no other rule. It is a working principle, and love is the rule by which it operates. The Spirit of God is the spirit of love and the health of a sound mind. Every pulsation of the new heart is the impulse of the spirit of love. Hence the brotherhood is beloved, and all mankind embraced in unbounded good will. When the tongue speaks, the hands and the feet move and operate under the unrestrained guidance of this principle, we have the Christian character  drawn  to  the  life.  For  meekness,  humility,  mercy, sympathy,  and  active  benevolence,  are  only  the  names  of  the various workings of this all-renovating, invigorating, sanctifying, and happifying principle. 'He that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him.' 

The  Christian,  or  the  new  man,  is  then  a  philanthropist  to  the utmost extent of the meaning of that word. Truth and love have made him free from all the tyrannies of passion, from guilt, and fear and shame; have filled him with courage, active and passive. Therefore, his enterprise, his capital enterprise, to which all others minister, is to take part with our Savior in the salvation of the world. 'If by any means I may save some,' are not the words of Paul only, but of every *new man*. Are they merchants, mechanics, husbandmen? — are they magistrates, lawyers, judges, or unofficial citizens? — are  they  masters,  servants,  fathers,  sons,  brothers, neighbors? — whatever, or wherever they may be, they live for God and his city, for the King and his empire. They associate not with the children of wrath — the miser, the selfish, the prodigal, the gay, the  proud,  the  slanderer,  the  tattler,  the  rake,  the  libertine,  the drunkard, the thief, the murderer. Every new man has left these precincts; has broken his league with Satan and his slaves, and has joined  himself  to  the  family  of  God.  These  he  complacently loves — those he pities — and does good to all. 

The character of the new man is an elevated character. Feeling himself a son and an heir of God, he cultivates the temper, spirit, and behavior, which corresponds with so exalted a relation. He despises every thing mean, grovelling, earthly, sensual, devilish. As the only begotten and well beloved Son of God is to be the model of his future personal glory, so the character which Jesus sustained amongst men, is the model of his daily imitation. His everyday aspiration is —  

- Thy fair example will I trace, 

To teach me what I ought to be; Make me by thy transforming grace, Lord Jesus, daily more like thee." 

The law of God is hid in his heart. The living oracles dwell in his mind;  and  he  grows  in  favor  with  God  as  he  grows  in  the knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ his Lord. As a new born babe he desires the unadulterated milk of the word of God, that he may grow by it; for as the thirsty hart pants after the brooks of water, so pants his soul after God. Thus he lives to God, and walks with him. This is the character of the regenerate — of him that is born of God — of the new man in Christ Jesus. This is the change of heart, of life, and of character, which is the tendency and the fruit of the process of regeneration, as taught and exemplified by the Apostles, and those commended by God, in their writings. 

We now proceed to offer a few remarks on physical regeneration, the second part of our subject.
