Part III: Kingdom of Heaven. 

***GENERAL ESSAYS1*** 

1. Patriarchal Age of the World 

   The  world  has  its  infancy  as  well  as  man.  Families  preceded nations.  Family  worship  was,  therefore,  the  first  religious institution. 

At the head of this institution naturally stood *the father of every family.* From necessity and from choice, he was the prophet, the priest, and the king of his household. As a *prophet,* he instructed his household in the knowledge of God, and in the history of man. As a *priest,* he officiated at his family altar, interceded for those under his care, and pronounced benedictions upon his children. As a *lawgiver* and *king,* he commanded his children and servants, and rewarded them according to merit. By a divine ordinance, the *first fathers  of  mankind*  were  thus  constituted  prophets,  priests,  and kings. Hence, the first religious and political institution is properly called '*the Patriarchal.*' 

Family worship was, then, the *first social worship;* and during the first ages of the world (for at least 2500 years) it was the  *only social worship,* of divine authority. Though other institutions have since  been  added,  this  has  never  been  superseded.  Having  its foundation  in  the  matrimonial  compact,  the  most  ancient  of  all religious  and  political  institutions,  and  this  being  founded  on nature itself, it never can be superseded. While the forms of this worship have always been adapted to the genius of the various revelations  of  God  vouchsafed  to  mankind,  it  has  continued through all the changes of six thousand years, and will continue till the day when men, like angels of God, shall neither marry nor give in marriage. 

Family worship, so long as it continued the only social worship, underwent  no  material  change;  and  this  is  the  period  which  is properly called *the Patriarchal age of the world.* So long as the descendants  of  one  man  and  one  woman  continued  under  the paternal roof, or until they became heads of families themselves, they  continued  under  this  religious  and  political  administration. And if, after marriage, they did not migrate to a great distance from the  patrimonial  inheritance,  the  paternal  authority  was  still acknowledged and acquiesced in. Thus, in process of time, he who at  first  was  only  the  head  of  a  single  family,  if  his  days  were prolonged and his progeny multiplied, became the paternal prince, or chief patriarch of a tribe. 

In the youth of time and freshness of human nature, families soon became  large;  and  as  the  father  and  head  could  not  always  be present while he lived, and as he might die before all his children could have become heads of families, it became necessary that a substitute in his absence, and a successor in case of his premature death,  should  be  appointed  to  fill  his  place  and  administer  the affairs of the family. Nature and reason alike pointed to the first born son, and religion consecrated him his vicegerent. Hence, the privileges and honors of the first born son were both religious and political; and thus the duties devolving upon him gave him a right to a double portion of the inheritance. Esau was, therefore, both *prodigal* and *profane* in selling his birthright for a meal of pottage. 

The  antiquity  of  this  arrangement  appeared  from  the  envy  and jealousy of Cain, roused at the rejection of his offering and the acceptance  of  that  of  Abel.  That  jealousy  seems  to  have  been kindled into rage because of his birthright. This is fairly implied in God's address to Cain, when that address is fairly translated and understood. "If ye do well, shall you not have the excellency; and if you do not well, sin precludes you (from the excellency.) And (Abel shall be subject to you) to you shall be his desire, and you shall rule over him."2 

The moral and religious institutions of the patriarchal or family worship, which continued from the fall of Adam to the covenant of circumcision,  were  the  Sabbath,  the  service  of  the  altar,  oral instruction, prayer, praise, and benediction. With the addition of circumcision in the family of one patriarch, for special purposes these  were  the  parts  of  that  system  which  continued  for  two thousand five hundred years. 

The religious observance of weeks or Sabbaths in commemoration of Creation, and prospective of an eternal rest, to arise out of the sacrificial and typical institution, was religiously observed to the giving of the law, or the erection of the Jewish institution. Thus the law of the Sabbath commences with the words, "*Remember the sabbath.*"  The  righteous  always  remembered  the  weeks,  and regarded the conclusion of the week as holy to the Lord. Hence, even  after  the  apostasy,  which  issued  in  the  neglect  of  family worship, in consequence of the sons of God intermarrying with the daughters of men, and which brought a flood of water upon the world of the ungodly — we find Noah religiously counting his weeks even while incarcerated in the ark. In the wilderness of Sin, before the giving of the law, we also find the Jews observing the Sabbath. And to facilitate the observance of it, God wrought three special miracles  during  the  peregrinations  of  Israel.  He  gave  two  days' portion  of  manna  on  the  sixth  day — none  on  the  seventh — and preserved from putrefaction that portion laid up for the Sabbath.3 

Sin offerings and thank offerings, on altars both of stone and earth, were  presented  to  the  Lord — the  former  in  faith  of  the  promise concerning the bruising the serpent's head by the offspring of the woman — the latter in grateful acknowledgment of the goodness of God  in  creation  and  providence.  Cain,  without  faith  in  the promised redemption, like many deists and natural religionists in our time, did  acknowledge the  goodness  and care of God by a thank-offering; but Abel, *by faith in that promise,* not only offered his thank offering, but a lamb as a sin offering: therefore, while God respected not Cain's oblation without faith in that promise, he testified in favor of the *gifts* of Abel — he accepted his sin offering and his thank offering. 

In the very brief and general outlines of almost two thousand five hundred years given us in the book of Genesis, we find sundry allusions  to  this  part  of  the  patriarchal  institution.  Immediately after his egress from the ark, we find Noah rearing his altar upon the baptized earth, and of every clean bird and beast offering to the Lord whole burnt offerings. Thus began Noah, after the deluge, to worship the Lord according to the patriarchal institution. And thus we  find  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Job,  and  other  patriarchs presenting their sacrifices to the Lord, while the family worship was the only religious institution to the world. 

Even libations, drink offerings, and anointing as token of gratitude and consecration, are found in this most ancient and venerable, institution. "Jacob rose  up early in  the  morning, took  the stone which he had put for his pillow, set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it."4 "And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where 

God talked with him, even a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon."5 

A beautiful and instructive instance of ancient family worship, and of  the  sacredotal  functions,  as  exercised  by  the  patriarchs  in reference  to  *the  altar,*  we  have  in  that  most  ancient  of  books, supposed by many to have been written by Moses while in the land of  Midian;  but  according  to  others,  by  Job  himself,  who  was certainly contemporary with *Eliphaz the Temanite.* Eliphaz was the son of Teman, who was the son of Eliphaz, who was the first son of Esau, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham. He therefore lived before Moses. Thus we find him also officiating at the altar. We are told that "his sons  went and feasted in each other's houses, every one his day, and sent and called for their sisters to eat and drink with them. And it was so, that when the days of their feasting had gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned  and  cursed  God  in  their  hearts.  Thus  acted  Job continually."6 

The same Job, by divine appointment, acted as priest or intercessor in behalf of his three friends, princes of Edom: for having spoken amiss, they were commanded to take seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to Job, the servant of God, and to offer them up for themselves; and "Job my servant shall pray for you." "Job prayed for them, and the Lord accepted his prayer, and forgave Eliphaz, Bildad,  and  Zophar."  "The  Lord  also  accepted  and  blessed  Job after he had prayed for these his friends, and the Lord turned again the captivity of Job."7 

During this period of the world, there was but one high or general priest, specially called and sent by God. "He was King of Salem and Priest of the Most High God." To him the patriarch Abraham paid  tithes  or  gave  the  tenth  of  the  spoils  taken  in  war,  and Melchisedeck blessed him. He was of an order of his own sort. He had  no  predecessor,  successor,  nor  equal  in  the  age  of  family worship. 

From all these facts and documents we learn that the service of the altar belonged first to the father of the family — next, to his eldest son — that  it  consisted  in  presenting  sin  offerings  and  thank offerings of various sorts in behalf of himself or family — that all pious sons and individuals might *for themselves* erect altars, offer sacrifices,  and  pour  out  libations  and  thank  offerings  to  the Lord; — that  these  sacrificial  observances  were  generally,  if  not always,  accompanied  with  prayer,  intercession,  and thanksgivings; — and that intercession in behalf of those under the care of any father or patriarch was a part of the first institution. 

Benediction also was one of the first duties of this office. Fathers pronounced  blessings  on  their  children.  Superiors  in  age  and standing blessed their inferiors. Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob blessed the twelve patriarchs. The invocations  of  blessings  and  the  imposition  of  hands  upon  the head, were parts of the family worship institution. 

Concerning  prayer  and  praise,  as  we  cannot  imagine  a  religion without them, it is unnecessary to speak particularly of them as parts of the patriarchal institution. Jubal soon taught men to handle the harp and organ, and piety soon consecrated them to the praise of God. The melodies of nature soon taught men to tune his voice to God. Isaac went into the fields at eventide for secret prayer. Abraham interceded for Sodom until he was ashamed to push his importunities farther; and for Abimelech, king of Egypt, and his family, he made his requests to God. Of him and his patriarchal character God said, "I know Abraham that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the ways of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him."8 

Prophets of a public character were occasionally raised up to bring men back to the primitive simplicity of the patriarchal institution, as  well  as  to  lead  them  forward  to  the  future  developments  of God's purposes in reference to this work of redemption. Amongst these the most conspicuous were Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob. To all these were given new visions of the future, and thus they  were  all  preachers  of  righteousness  and  reformers  in  their respective generations. 

From these gleanings from the book of Genesis, one may learn that the family worship institution, which was divinely instituted in the first age of the world, embraced the observance of the Sabbath, the service  of  the  altar,  oral  instruction,  prayer,  intercession, thanksgiving, and benediction. It contemplated no other bond of union than the marriage covenant, and the relations springing out of it. Doing justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with God, were  enforced  in  all  its  maxims,  and  in  the  examples  of  those whom God honored and approved. 

There was, during the long period of this family institution, no community  separated  from  the  world  larger  than  a  single household — no public altars — no temples — no established order of public teachers; therefore, there were no initiating or separating institutions. There was no *circumcision* for the infant, nor *washing of regeneration* for the instructed. These institutions of latter times had respect to public professing communities; and therefore, for two  thousand  years  there  was  no  initiating  rite  or  ordinance amongst men. 

Wherever the family curtains were spread and a tent erected, the devout father built his own altar to the Lord, gathered his own children  and  domestics  around  him,  instructed  them  in  the knowledge  of  God  the  creator  and  preserver  of  all;  and  in  the history of man, his origin and destiny, as far as revealed to them. They  offered  their  thank  offerings,  acknowledgments  of  favors received;  and  when  conscious  of  sin,  they  presented  their  sin offering,  with  confessions,  and  in  faith  of  God's  promise, supplicated  pardon.  Such  are  the  essential  attributes  of  the patriarchal institution, and of the family worship, as learned from the writings of Moses. 

But as the root of all subsequent dispensations of God's mercy and favor  to  man  was  planted  in  the  patriarchal  institution,  it  is necessary  to  our  plan,  before  we  advance  farther,  to  pay  some attention to one of the patriarchs, whose fame is eternal, on whom God bestowed an honor above all earthly honor, and who stands enrolled in the annals of time as **the friend of god**. The intelligent reader needs not  to  be  informed that we now  call his  attention specially to Abraham.  

***Abraham*** 

Reader, attend! "I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: this is my name forever, and this is my memorial to  all  generations."  And  shall  not  the  name,  the  calling,  the blessing, and the history of Abraham always occupy large space in the records of God's government of man, and in all the details of his redemption! 

Because of his unprecedented faith in God's promises and exalted piety, he was constituted the *father of all believers;* and his whole life is made a model for all the children of God, as far as walking by faith in God's promises is an ornament to human character. 

Sufficient, then, to our present purpose, we observe, that *during the family worship institution,* a little after the commencement of the third Millennium, about the 75th year of his life, God appeared to Abraham while he yet lived in Ur of Chaldea, and commanded him to depart out of that country, and that he would do for him certain things.  Abraham  obeyed.  God  gratuitously  tendered  him  *two promises,* not only interesting and valuable to Abraham himself, but to all the human race. 

These two promises were intended to be the basis of a two-fold relation  to  God,  and  the  foundation  of  two  distinct  religious institutions,  called  "the  Old  Testament  and  the  New,"  "the  Old Covenant and the New," "the Two Covenants," and "the Covenants of Promise." These are contemplated in them the constitution for a temporal and spiritual kingdom of God — a kingdom of God of this world, and a kingdom of God not of this world. Be it, therefore, always remembered, when we attempt to form correct views of the whole economy of God's redemption, that these two promises were made while the patriarchal institution was yet standing and several centuries before its close. What, then, it will be asked, are these two promises?  

***Two Promises?*** 

We find them in their most simple form in the beginning of the 12th chapter of Genesis.  

**The first — **"*I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing. I will bless them that bless thee, curse them that curse thee.*" 

**The second** — "*In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.*" 

These  promises,  when  fully  developed,  contained  numerous blessings.  They  are,  however,  in  all  their  details  separate  and distinct from each other. Abraham's family alone are personally concerned  in  the  first — all  families  of  the  earth  in  the  second. Temporal and earthly are the blessings of the former — spiritual and eternal are the blessings of the latter. Paul calls the second, "The gospel preached to Abraham," and "The covenant confirmed by God in reference to the Messiah, four hundred and thirty  years before the giving of the law." The Jewish kingdom in all its glory was but the development of the first — the Christian kingdom in its present and future blessings is the consummation of the second. 

***Covenant of Circumcision*** 

In pursuance of the first promise, and in order to its exact and literal  accomplishment,  about  twenty-four  years  after  its promulgation of "*Covenant of Circumcision*" was established. This "covenant  in  the  flesh,"  marked  out  and  defined  the  natural descendants of Abraham, and gave to the world a full proof of the faithfulness  of  God,  putting  it  in  the  power  of  every  one  to ascertain how God keeps his covenant of promise with his people. This  gave  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham  the  title  of  "The Circumcision," and beautifully represented the separation of God's people from the children of this world.  

The land of Canaan, as *the inheritance* of this nation, is repeatedly promised to Abraham; and as soon as Isaac, the child of promise, is born  and  circumcised,  the  promise  of  the  "**seed**"  in  which  all nations were to be blessed, is confined to him. Not in Ishmael, but "in Isaac, shall *thy seed* be called."9 

After the death of Abraham and towards the close of the life of Isaac, his  father's  God  gave him a second edition  of these two promises. The first is considerably amplified in its details, while the second is repeated almost in the same words. That which was first  to  be  accomplished  is  first  developed,  and  its  provisions pointed out. "I will be with thee and will bless thee; for unto thee and to thy seed I will give all these countries, and I will perform all the oath which I sware to Abraham thy father; and will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give to thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws."10

The same two promises are repeated in almost the same words to Jacob, the son of Isaac at the time he had the vision of the ladder reaching from earth to heaven, while, in obedience to a command given him by his parents, he was on his way to Padan-aram in quest of a wife. On these *three* great occasions — to Abraham — to Isaac — to  Jacob — these  two  promises  are  solemnly  pronounced; always  standing  in  the  same  order — never  confounded;  but  as distinct as earth and heaven — as time and eternity. 

Four hundred and thirty years after the first solemn declaration of these promises, the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in virtue of the promise, were redeemed out of bondage, in Egypt, and saved from the tyranny and cruelty of Pharaoh. Then, in order to  the  *full  completion*  of  its  stipulations,  God,  by  the  hand  of Moses, proposed a covenant with all Israel at Sinai; in which he guarantees  to  do  all  for  them  contemplated  in  the  promise, confirmed by an oath to Abraham, in being a God to his seed after him.  

***Sinaitic Covenant*** 

This Sinaitic constituted them a kingdom of God, a holy nation, a peculiar  people.  All  the  blessings  comprehended  in  the  first promise to Abraham, or that could grow out of the relation to God, which  it  contemplated,  were  in  full  detail  carried  out  into  this transaction,  and  secured  to  the  whole  nation.  The  relation  was, however,  temporal,  and  its  blessings  temporal  and  earthly.  The second promise made no part of the Jewish institution or covenant at  Sinai,  more  than  it  did  of  the  patriarchal  or  antecedent institution. The typical or figurative part of the family worship, enlarged and improved, was translated into the *national* institution and made a part of it; and whatever *spiritual* privilege was enjoyed by  the  Jew,  was  enjoyed  upon  the  same  principle  with  the patriarch — by faith in the second promise, and by an intelligent and believing attendance upon all the  appointed means which either prefigured the coming redemption, or realized the blessings which were to be derived through the promised seed. 

The **seed** in which all the families of the earth were to be blessed, was in the nation, but in no other sense than as it was in the people while in Egypt, or in the patriarchs before they went down into Egypt.  It  was  in  the  nation,  but  no  element  of  the  national institution. They had the second promise made to their fathers, and all the faithful and approved among them believed that promise, and acted conformably to it. Thus amongst the Jews, even before the coming of the Messiah, they were 

***Two Seeds*** 

The  natural  and  the  spiritual  children  of  Abraham.  The  whole nation were his literal and natural children; and such of them as believed the second promise and understood it were not only his natural children, but his children in the same sense in which all *believing Gentiles* are by virtue of the second promise constituted the  children  of  Abraham.  The  first,  like  Ishmael,  were  born according to the flesh — the fleshy seed of Abraham; the second, like  Isaac,  were  the  children  of  faith  in  the  promise:  and  thus Abraham  is  the  constituted  father  of  all  who  believe  in  that promise, whether of his flesh or not. 

But the second promise was not fulfilled for nearly one thousand five hundred years after the first, or after the national institution was confirmed at Sinai; and therefore  

***The Blessings of Abraham*** 

Which as to come on the nations through his seed, through faith in the accomplished promises, was to be the basis and the substance of a new institution. This "blessing of Abraham" includes all the spiritual and eternal blessings which are laid up in his seed, who is the ark of this new constitution, in whom all the promises of God are verified, and in whom they are deposited for the comfort and salvation of all the faithful children of God. Whatever concerned the  family  of  Abraham,  coming  through  the  first  promise, descended  upon  the  family  principle  which  is  only  *flesh;*  but whatever concerns all saints of all nations descends upon the new principle of *faith.* "They who are of faith," says Paul, "are blessed with believing Abraham." And "If you be Christ's, then" and only then, "are you Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise." 

The blessing of Abraham was then promised in the patriarchal age antecedent to the Jewish national institution, and independent of it; therefore  that  institution  cannot  affect,  much  less  disannul,  the blessings  promised  in  the  covenant,  confirmed  before  by  God, respecting the Messiah, in the time of family worship, and four hundred and thirty years before the Jewish institution began. 

In calling Abraham, and in making him the father of many nations, and the depository of still more precious promises and revelations, God did not supersede the family worship. He only added to the stock of religious knowledge, strengthened the faith, and enlarged the hopes of that single family. The family institution continued without the slightest change, except in one particular specified in the  covenant  of  circumcision,  as  respected  the  single  family  of Abraham,  for  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after  the  charter concerning his seed and that concerning the Messiah were secured to this renowned patriarch. Thus we have traced the continuance of the family religion, or patriarchal economy, for two thousand five hundred years, and are now prepared to make a few remarks on the Jewish  national  institution,  though  we  have  already  anticipated almost all that is necessary to our present object. Still, however, we shall make it the object of a distinct notice. (See Next Essay) 

2. The Jewish Institution 

In this age of improvement of divine institutions, we read and hear much of "two dispensations of the covenant of grace;" thus making the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  institutions  dispensations  of  one "covenant  of  grace."  Why  not  make  the  patriarchal,  (still  more venerable for its antiquity, and which continued a thousand years longer than the Jewish,) also  a dispensation of  the covenant  of grace, and then we should have had  *three* dispensations of one covenant? This is but a "*show* of wisdom." The Holy Spirit calls them  "two  covenants,"  or  "two  institutions,"  and  not  two modifications of one covenant; and it speaks of each as established upon  promises.  The  Jewish  was  established  upon  temporal  and earthly promises, contained in the first promise made to Abraham; but  the  new,  says  Paul,  "is  established  upon  *better  promises,*" growing out of that concerning *the blessing of the nations* in the promised seed.11

The Jewish institution commenced and continued about 1500 years before the Reign of Heaven began. It was not substituted for the family worship, but added to it; affecting, however, the patriarchal institution in some respects, as far as concerned the single family of Abraham. The individual families of the nation of the Jews, *as such,* had still their family worship — still the worship of God was heard in the dwellings of the righteous; and, like Joshua, every good Israelite said, "As for me and my family, we will serve the Lord." 

In four hundred years the family of Abraham had, in the line of Isaac and Jacob, in fulfilment of the first promise, grown up into millions. Not less than two millions12 came up out of Egypt under the  conduct  of  Moses.  The  heavenly  Father,  in  progressive development of his plan of blessing all nations, leaves all the world under the family worship institution, and erects the whole progeny of  Abraham  that  came  up  out  of  Egypt  into  one  great  national institution. He condescends to appear in the character of *King of the Jews,* and to make them a *kingdom of God,* as preparatory to the appearance of his *Son,* who is predestined to be the King of the whole  earth,  and  to  have  a  kingdom  which  shall  ultimately embrace all the nations of the world.  

The  twelve  tribes  were  brought  into  the  form  of  one  great worshipping family, presenting through the common High Priest their united worship to God. This gave rise to the erection of one public house consecrated to the Lord, as the place of meeting in their social and national character. A constitution, political, moral, and religious, was submitted to the people; and on their adoption of it, they became the covenanted people of God. This constitutional kingdom was built upon precepts and promises; and its worship when fully developed was  little more than the extension of the family worship to one great national family. They had one king, one high priest, one national altar, one national house of God, one morning and evening service, one great national sacrifice, and one great annual atonement. The nation was a family of families, and whatever pertained to a single family in its family worship was extended and accommodated to this great confederate family. 

Various mystic and significant institutions distinguished this nation from all others; for it was one principal object of its institution to keep its subjects separate and distinct from all other people till Messiah (the promised seed) should come. Another object was, to picture  out  in  appropriate  types  the  spiritual  worship  of  the kingdom  of  heaven,  and  to  exhibit  the  great  doctrines  of  faith, repentance,  remission, adoption, and inheritance, by  picturesque images, ingeniously devised to adumbrate the whole doctrine of reconciliation and sanctification to God. 

The Jewish institution is not to be regarded only in its political, moral, and religious aspects, but especially in its figurative and prospective character. God so wisely and benevolently contrived it from its origin to its close, that its whole history — the fates and fortunes of its subjects from their descent into Egypt, their travels thence  to  Canaan  and  settlement  in  the  land  of  promise — their fortunes in that land to their final catastrophe, should exactly and impressively shadow forth the new institution with the fates and fortunes of the subjects of this new and more glorious order of things. "All these things happened to them for *types,*" (examples,) says Paul, "and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world have come." The same great commentator on this  institution  not  only  presents  the  history  of  its  subjects  as instructive  to  the  citizens  of  the  new  institution,  but  of  the tabernacle he says, "It was a figurative representation for the time then present," and the furniture thereof "the patterns of things in the heavens." "The law," he adds, "contained only a shadow of the good things to come." A shadow, indeed, proceeding from a man, a house,  a  tree,  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  an  exact  image  or representation  of  them;  yet,  when  explained  by  a  verbal description, it greatly facilitates an easy and correct conception of them. 

So full of the doctrine of the new institution was the old, that we find  all  the  Apostles  and  Christian  writers  unceremoniously applying every thing they quote from the law, the prophets, and the psalms,  to  the  Messiah,  his  kingdom,  and  the  fortunes  of  his people; as if the Jewish writings had no other object than to unfold the kingdom of heaven. Jesus begins with Abraham seeing his day on Mount Moriah in the typical resurrection of Isaac. Paul regards Hagar,  Ishmael,  Sarah, Isaac, as  the best  illustration of the  *two institutions;* and John ends with the description of the descent of Jerusalem from heaven. 

Every one, then, who would accurately understand the Christian institution must approach it through the Mosaic; and he that would be a proficient in the Jewish, must make Paul his commentator. While the mere politician, moralist, or religionist, contemplate the one without the other, though he may find much to admire in both, he  will  never  understand  either.  A  veil,  thick  as  that  which concealed the glory of the face of Moses from the Israelites, will hide the glory of the Jewish and Christian institutions from his view. 

Not only did the tabernacle, the temple, their furniture, the service of both, the priests, the sacrifices, the festivals, the convocations, and all the ordinances of that Ritual, together with the history of that people, assume the picturesque and figurative character, but almost all the illustrious and highly distinguished personages of that institution were made prophetic or typical of the Messiah or of the great incidents of his life, sufferings, and triumphs, and the leading  affairs  of  his  government.  Amongst  *persons*  in  the patriarchal  and  Jewish  ages  who,  in  one  or  more  prominent characters or incidents, or in their general history adumbrated the Messiah  and  his  reign,  the  following  group  occupy  a  lofty eminence: — Adam,  Abel,  Noah,  Melchisedeck,  Isaac,  Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Samson, David, Jonah. Of *things* of this class, as well as persons highly figurative and instructive, are the visions of Jacob's ladder — the burning bush — the pillar of cloud and fire — the manna — the rock Horeb, a fountain of living water in the wilderness — the veil of Moses — the brazen serpent — the victory over the nations of Canaan, and the land of Canaan itself. And of *ordinances,* the passover, the scape goat, the red heifer, the year of jubilee, the law of the leper, the kinsman redeemer, the cities of refuge; together with all the sacrifices, washings, anointings, and consecrations of the *holy* nation. 

But  a  third  object  of  the  Jewish  institution,  of  paramount importance to the world, was the furnishing of a new alphabet and language  (the  elements  of  heavenly  science,)  without  which  it would appear to have been almost, if not altogether, impossible to learn  the  spiritual  things,  or  to  make  any  proficiency  in  the knowledge  of  those  relations  which  Christianity  unfolds.  The language of the new institution is therefore explained by that of the old. No one can understand the dialect of the kingdom of heaven who has not studied the dialect of the antecedent administrations of heaven  over  the  patriarchs  and  Jews.  The  most  striking  and characteristic attribute of the sacred dialect is, that the elements of it  are  composed  of  the  incidents  of  history,  or  what  we  call *remarkable providences.* 

I  cannot  explain  myself  better,  not  render  my  readers  a  more essential service, than by illustrating by an actual detail of sacred history, the following proposition, viz.: — *That sacred history or the remarkable  instances  of  God's  providence  to  the  Jews  and Patriarchs, are the foundation  of  the sacred dialect  of  the new institution.* Or, if the reader will understand it better, it may be expressed — *All  the  leading  words  and  phrases  of  the  New Testament are to be explained and understood by the history of the Jewish nation and God's government of them.* Take the following as a mere specimen: —  

God *called* Abram out of Ur, and changed his name into *Abraham;* and the name of his wife Sarai into *Sarah.* He *promised* Isaac as the  person  in  whom  his  *seed*  should  be  *called.*  God  did  *tempt* Abraham,  commanding  him  to  *offer*  Isaac  for  a  burnt offering — Isaac  had  two  sons — Esau  the  elder,  and  Jacob  the younger. Esau *despised* his *birthright* and *sold* it to Jacob. Jacob wrestled with God, and *prevailed;* he obtained a blessing, and was therefore called *Israel.* He had *twelve* sons: of these Joseph was his favorite. His brethren *envied* him, and *sold* him for twenty pieces of silver. Joseph *found grace* in the sight of his master. *The Lord was with Joseph.* He was cast into prison, and from thence was elevated  to  the  *governor*  of  Egypt  under  Pharaoh.  A  famine  in Canaan compelled Jacob and his sons into Egypt for bread, and Joseph was *made known* to his brethren. Joseph died in Egypt and left his father's house in the land. They multiplied exceedingly, and the Egyptians greatly *afflicted* and *oppressed* the Israelites. *Moses* was born and exposed: Pharaoh's daughter found him and *adopted* him for a son. Moses fled into Midian, and married the daughter of the priest or prince of Midian, and kept his father-in-law's flock in the *desert,* and came to Horeb, *the mountain of God.* The Lord appeared to him in *a flame of fire* in a bush. The bush burned and was not consumed. Moses *drew near,* and then first stood on *holy ground.* God *sent* him to Egypt to lead *his* people out of *bondage.* 

God made him say to the *children of Israel,* '**I am** has sent me to you. Gather the *elders* of Israel and say to them, *The Lord God* of your fathers, the God of Abraham,' etc. 'has sent me to you. I will *smite*  Egypt  with  my  *wonders,*  and  *bring  you  up  out  of  the afflictions* of Egypt. Tell Pharaoh, Israel is *my son — my first born.* Take Aaron with thee, and thou shalt *put words into his mouth;* and I will be *with thy mouth* and with his mouth: he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him *instead of God.* Take thy *rod* in thy hand. The Lord *sent* Aaron to Moses: he met him in the mount and *kissed* him. And the Lord *visited* his people. And the people *believed when they heard* that the Lord had *looked upon* their affliction. Pharaoh oppressed them still more. The Lord said, with a *strong hand* shall he let them go. I will *redeem* them with a stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great  *judgments.*  I  will  give  you Canaan for a *heritage;* I will take you to me *for a people. I will be your God.*' 

Moses  said,  I  am  a  man  of  *uncircumcised  lips,*  and  how  shall Pharaoh *hearken* to me? I have made thee a *god* to Pharaoh, and Aaron *thy prophet.*  I will  multiply my  *signs,*  and bring out  *my people,* and *harden* Pharaoh's heart. When he says, "Show me a miracle," cast your rod before him, and *it shall become* a serpent. Still  Pharaoh  refused,  and  *hardened  his  heart.*  The  magicians overcome with the *signs,* said, *This is the finger of God.* The *God of the Hebrews* said, Let *my people go.* I have *roused* thee up (as a lion)  to  show  in  you  my  power,  and  to  make  *my  name  known* through *all the earth.* The Lord slew all the *first born* of Egypt after he had *plagued* them exceedingly. Pharaoh commanded them to depart; but he pursued them to the Red Sea. Israel fainted at the sight before and behind them. Moses said, Stand still and see *the salvation  of  God.*  The  sea  was  divided.  Covered  with  a  cloud, Israel marched through  as  on dry  ground. The  waters stood on either  side  as  a  wall.  Pharaoh  pursued  with  his  chariots  and horsemen, but the waters returned, and they were drowned. Thus the  Lord *redeemed, saved, delivered, and brought  Israel  out  of bondage.* 

After this deliverance, Moses and the children of Israel sang, "The Lord is become *my salvation;* he is *my God.* Thou hast overthrown them  that  *rose  up  against  thee.*  Thou  hast  *led  forth  thy  people* whom thou *hast redeemed.* Thou *hast guided them* in thy strength to thy *holy habitation.* The inhabitants of Canaan shall be still as a stone  till  *thy  people*  pass  over,  O  Lord,  the  people  *thou  hast purchased.*  Thou  shalt  plant  them  in  the  mountain  of  *thine inheritance;* in the *sanctuary* which *thy hands* have *established.*" 

They came into *the wilderness of Sin.* They cried for bread, and God *rained bread from heaven upon them,* that he might *prove* them whether or not they would *walk in his law,* and they did eat manna forty years till they came to the borders of Canaan. 

They complained for water, and tempted God. And Moses *smote the rock* in Horeb, and water gushed out. But Moses was wroth, and smote the rock twice, and he and Aaron thus *rebelled* against God, and fell in the wilderness. The Lord made a covenant with the whole nation at Sinai, and made them a *peculiar treasure* above all people — a *kingdom of priests,* a *holy nation;* and God *spake* all the words of the law, written on two tables of stone; and  *spake to Israel from heaven.* 

The Lord, by Moses, gave them directions for rearing a *tabernacle,* and a pattern for all its furniture. And as *a ransom for his soul,* every man, rich and poor, was to pay half a shekel as an *offering to the Lord* to *make an atonement* for his soul; and it was given for *the service* of the tabernacle. When the tabernacle was reared and finished, *the glory of the Lord* filled the tabernacle and the *cloud* covered it. And when the cloud *was taken up,* they journeyed; but until it was taken up, they journeyed not. The *cloud* was on the tabernacle by day, and *fire* was on it by night, in the sight of all Israel throughout all their journeys. 

And before Moses died he *laid his hands* upon Joshua, and gave him a *charge* as the *Lord commanded;* and thus put *honor* upon him, that the children of Israel might be *obedient* to him as their *savior.* "As I was *with Moses,* so will I be *with thee*," saith God: "I will not fail thee nor *forsake* thee." 

Could we thus proceed with the history of this people, and add to their  history  the  observance  of  their  religious  institutions,  we should find out the true meaning of the sacred style of the New Testament  with  more  accuracy  and  certainty,  than  from  all  the commentators  of  ancient  and  modern  times.  This,  as  a  sample, must suffice for our present purpose. 

From the premises now before us, the specifications of the outlines of the Sinaitic and national institution, and the terms and phrases found  in  the  history  of  this  people,  we  may  discover  in  what *relation* they stood to  God, and what  *favors*  he bestowed upon them in that relation. 

They were *called* and *chosen,* or the *elect* of God as a nation. As such,  they  were  *delivered,  saved,  bought,*  or  *purchased,*  and *redeemed.* God is said to have *created, made, formed,* and *begotten* them. As such he is called their *Father,* their *God,* their *Redeemer,* their *King,* their *Savior,* their *Salvation;* and they are called his *children,  sons*  and  *daughters;  born  to  him,*  his  *house,  people, inheritance, family, servants.* 

As a *chartered* and congregated people, they are called *the city, the holy city, the city of the Lord, Jerusalem, Zion, Mount Zion, the city of David.* Other nations in contrast with them, are called *not a people, aliens, strangers, enemies, far off, unclean.* 

Various similitudes expressive of the kind relation in which they stood  to  God  are  also  found  in  the  pages  of  the  ancient institutions — such as *husband* and *wife, shepherd* and *flock, vine* and *vineyard, mother* and *children.* They are said to be *written* or *enrolled* in *the book of God;* to be *planted, washed, sanctified, clean,  separated  to  God;*  they  are  called  *the  house,  building, sanctuary, dwelling place* of God; *a kingdom of priests, a holy nation, a peculiar people, saints,* etc. 

Those who are curious to trace these phrases descriptive of the relation and privileges of this ancient kingdom of God, had better (in addition to the passages quoted in their history from Egypt to the  Jordan,)  examine  the  following  passages: —   Exodus  14:30; 15:16;  19:6;  Deut.  4:37;  7:6;  10:15;  14:1;  1:31;  7:5;  32:6; 32:18-19; 18:7; 3:18, 20; 12:9. 1 Kings 3:8. Psalm 105:6; 33:13; 105:43; 106:5, 21; 124:2; 149:2. Isa 41:8-9, 43:1, 3, 5, 7; 51:2, 4. Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the Psalms of David throughout, etc. 

Unless  we  should  write  a  full  treatise  on  these  antecedent institutions, we cannot with propriety descend farther into details. The outlines, as far as subordinate to the theme of this essay, are now  before  the  reader;  and  with  this  preparation  we  shall  now invite his attention to **the kingdom of heaven.** 

3. The Kingdom of Heaven 

And why, an *American* would say, is it not called the *Republic* of Heaven, and the Chief called the *President* of a Celestial Republic? Certainly there were the Republics of Greece and Rome before the doctrine of this Kingdom was first promulged, and the Gentiles as well as the Jews could have understood the figure of a Republic as well as that of a Kingdom. It was not, then, because there was not in society a model or type of this sort; but because such a type would have been inapposite to the nature of this institution. 

History testifies that Republics are better adapted to peace than war,  and  that  they  are  forced  and  unnatural  organizations  of society. Aristocracies and Republics owe all their attractions to the excessive corruptions of the governments under which they have originated. They are the reaction of force and fraud, of cruelty and oppression,  and  are  sustained  by  the  remembrance  and apprehension  of  the  evils  which  occasioned  them.  They  have always been extolled or admired either in contrast with vices and enormities  of  degenerate  and  profligate  monarchies,  or  in  the freshness of the recollections of the wrongs and outrages which have occasioned them; and men have generally tired of them when they became corrupt and forgetful of the oppressions and crimes which  forced  them  into  being.  So  that  the  corruptions  of monarchies have given birth to Republics, and the corruptions of these have originated monarchies again. 

In these last days of degeneracy, Republics are great blessings to mankind, as good physicians are blessings in times of pestilence; but yet it must be confessed that it would be a greater blessing to be  without  plagues  and  doctors.  While  men  are,  however,  so degenerate, and while selfishness and injustice are so rampant in society, republican officers are better than kings — because we can get rid of them sooner. They are indeed, kings under another name, with  a  short-leased  authority;  and  our  experience  fully demonstrates  that  in  these  degenerate  days  the  reigns  of  our republican kings are nearly long enough. Till the King of kings comes,  we  Christians  ought  to  be  good  republicans,  under  the conviction that human governments seldom grow better, and that the popular doctrine of our country is true — that political authority generally makes a man worse, and public favors almost invariably corrupt the heart. Rapid rotation in office is the practical influence of the republican theory; and the experiment proves that, brief as republican  authority  is,  it  is  sometimes  too  long  for  republican virtue  to  sustain  without  deterioration.  Now  if  this  be  true  of republican virtue, the brightest and the best, what earthly virtue can long resist the contamination of long protracted authority! 

Monarchy is the only form of government, however, which nature recognizes. It was the first, and it will be the last. A government with three or thirty heads is a monster; and therefore the beast that represents it comes out of the sea with a plurality of horns as well as heads. 

The  most  approved  theory  of  human  nature  and  of  human government now current wherever the English language is spoken, either in the Old World or in the New, is that a monarchy would be always  the  best  government,  because  the  cheapest,  the  most efficient, and the most dignified; provided only, that the crown was placed on the wisest head and the sceptre wielded by the purest hands.  Could  we  always  secure  this  we  would  be  monarchists: because we cannot, we are all republicans. 

But,  after  this  apology  for  the  phrase  *Kingdom  of  Heaven,*  we would recall the attention of the reader to the concession, made by republicans themselves, that a kingdom is better adapted to a state of  war,  than  a  republic;  and  that  this  beautiful,  though  most appropriate figure, which occurs in the New Testament more than one hundred and fifty times, and very often in the Old, presupposes a  state  of  war  as  existing  in  the  universe.  But  for  the  reasons assigned in preference of a monarchy, the *natural* government of the universe always was, is, and evermore shall be monarchy. God himself is of necessity absolute monarch of the universe. Had he not  essentially  sustained  that  relation  to  all  his  creatures,  there never  could  have  been  rebellion  nor  sin  in  his  dominions.  The systems of nature are all after this model. Every sun is a king over the  system  which  it  controls;  and  in  every  sphere  there  is  one controlling and supreme principles. It will be the last government; for  when  the  episode  in  the  great  drama  of  *rational*  existence which sin occasioned, shall have been completed, the government of the universe will assume its ancient order, and God be supreme monarch again. But this will not be till Jesus gives up the kingdom to God which a preternatural state of things put into his hands. This cannot be till he has subdued man to his rightful allegiance, or destroyed forever every opponent to the absolute monarchy of the Eternal Supreme: "for Jesus must reign till all his enemies be put under his feet." 

The kingdom which Jesus has received from his Father, however heavenly,  sublime,  and  glorious  it  may  be  regarded,  is  only temporal. It had a beginning, and it will have an end; for he must reign only *till* all enemies are put under his feet. But the transition of the sceptre into the hands of Emmanuel has not changed the government. He is now the hereditary Monarch of the universe, as well as the proper King of his own kingdom. He now reigns as absolutely over all principalities, hierarchs, and powers, celestial and terrestrial, as did the great God and Father of the universe, before he was invested with the regal authority. 

We have said it was a preternatural state of things which originated the kingdom of Jesus: therefore the object of this remedial reign is to destroy that preternatural state of things — to put down sin. Now as  all  human  governments  presuppose  disorder,  and  as  the kingdoms of this world generally have risen out of confusion and war, the kingdom of heaven of which we are to speak owes its origin to the celestial and terrestrial apostacies — the revolt of Satan and of Adam. Were there no justice within, or violence without, civil government would be wholly unnecessary, and its appendages an excresence upon society. Had there not been such a revolt and rebellion as sacred history records, there would have been no such kingdom  of  heaven  as  that  over  which  Jesus  the  Messiah  now presides.  Now  as  both  this  King  and  kingdom,  and  all  that appertains to them, were occasioned by such a preternatural state of things, we must view them in all their attributes and details, with reference to those circumstances which called them into being. 

***The Elements of a Kingdom*** 

We  must  understand  the  type,  or  we  cannot  understand  the antitype. We must understand that which is natural before we can understand  that  which  is  spiritual.  What,  then  are  the  essential elements of a kingdom as existing among men? They are five, viz: King,  Constitution,  Subjects,  Laws,  and  Territory.  Such  are  the essential parts of every political kingdom, perfect in its kind, now existing on earth. 

In *forming a state,* the essential elements are people and country. The  people  make  a  constitution,  and  this  makes  a  President  or King, citizens or subjects, and every thing else belonging to a state. It is, then, the relation into which the people resolve themselves, which make it a republic, an aristocracy, a monarchy. Do they choose a monarchy? They first make a constitution, and this places one upon the throne — makes them subjects, and then gives them laws. Although the constitution is first, in the order of nature, of all the elements of a kingdom, for it makes one man a king and the rest subjects; yet we cannot imagine a constitution in reference to a kingdom, without king and subjects. In speaking of them in detail, we cannot then speak of any one of them as existing without the others — we  must  regard  them  as  correlates,  and  as  coming  into existence contemporaneously. There is no husband nor wife before marriage, neither can there be a husband without a wife; yet one of the  parties  must  be  made  before  the  other.  Marriage  makes  a husband out of a bridegroom, and a wife out of the bride. So the constitution  makes  the  king  or  the  governor;  the  citizens  or subjects, out of the people, as the case may be; for there never can be a king or subject without a constitution, or, what is the same thing,  an  agreement,  verbal  or  written,  for  certain  privileges stipulated  and  conditioned.  In  every  well  regulated  political kingdom,  *in  the  order  of  nature,*  the  elements  stand  thus.  1. Constitution; 2. King; 3. Subjects; 4. Laws; 5. Territory.  

In the kingdom which God set up by Moses, the elements stood in this order. The constitution was first proposed under which God condescended to be their King, and they were to be regarded as his people or subjects; he then gave them laws and established them in the territory before promised. 

But in the kingdom of nature, or in the original kingdom of God, the elements are only four, and the order in which they stand are: 1. King; 2. Subjects; 3. Laws; 4. Territory. As Father and Creator of the kingdom, God himself was absolute Sovereign, whose will is the supreme law of the whole realm of nature. 

Having  ascertained  the  essential  elements  of  a  *kingdom,*  and marked the order in which they stand, before we particularly attend to  those  elements  in  order,  we  shall  ask,  Why  this  kingdom  is called the kingdom of *Heaven?* 

***The Name*** 

Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven are not one and the same thing. God is not the Kingdom of God. But as the kingdom of God is  something  pertaining  to  God,  so  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is something pertaining to heaven, and consequently to God. Whether always the phrases "the Kingdom of God" and the "Kingdom of heaven" exactly represent the same thing, certain it is that both phrases are often applied to the same institution.13

This is true of them, whether translated *reign* or *kingdom;* and it is very evident that frequently the original world *basileia* ought in preference to be rendered *reign,* inasmuch as this term better suits all those passages where *coming* or *approaching* is spoken of: for while  reigns  or  administrations  approach  and  recede,  kingdoms have  attributes  and  boundaries  which  are  stationary.  Reign  and Kingdom  of  God,  though  sometimes  applicable  to  the  same subject, never contemplate it in the same light. They are, indeed, as intimately connected as the reign of king William and the kingdom of Great Britain. The former represents the administration of the kingdom, and the latter the state over which this administration extends.  

Two  good  reasons  may  be  offered  why  Matthew,  the  oldest Christian writer, generally prefers Kingdom or Reign of *Heaven,* to the  phrase  Kingdom  or  Reign  of  *God:*  I  say  *generally,*  for  he occasionally uses *both* designations.14 He wrote to Jews in Judea 

who expected a Messiah, a King, and a Kingdom of God on *earth,* a mere improvement of the Jewish system; and therefore to raise their conception he delights to call it the Reign or Kingdom of *Heaven*, in contrast with that earthly Kingdom of God, of which they were so long in possession. 

He also found a good reason in the idiom of the Jewish prophets for using the word *Heaven* (both in the singular and plural form) for *God.* Daniel told the Assyrian monarch that his kingdom would be sure to him when he would have learned that "the *Heavens* do rule;" yet in the preceding verse he says, "Till thou knowest that the Most High rules in the kingdom of man," — thus using *Heavens* and  *the  Most  High*  as  synonymous.  The  Psalmist  says,  "The wicked  set  their  mouths  against  the  *Heavens.*"  The  Prodigal confesses that he had "sinned against *Heaven,*" and Jesus himself asked  whether  the  baptism  of John  was  "from  *Heaven*  or  from men." Thus he was authorized from the Jewish use of the word to regard it as equivalent to *God.* If, then, Matthew had meant no more by the phrase "Kingdom of Heaven" and the "Kingdom of God," he was justified by the Jewish use of the word *heaven,* to apply it in that sense. Some may object to all these remarks upon Matthew's manner, that it was Jesus Christ and the preachers he commissioned  who  called  it  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  not Matthew  Levi.  To  such  we  reply  that  the  other  sacred  writers uniformly, in reciting all the same parables and incidents, use the phrase "Kingdom of God," and *never* the phrase "the Kingdom of Heaven." 

From the use of the phrase "Kingdom of God," we must, I think, regard him as having special reference to the reason first assigned. He does not say the Kingdom of *Heaven* shall be taken from the Jews; but  "The Kingdom  of God shall  be taken from  you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits of it:" for although it might  with  propriety,  in  his  acceptation,  he  said  that  the  Jews already had the kingdom of God, it could not be said that they had the kingdom of *Heaven* as proclaimed by Matt. 15:1-39  

When  compared  with  the  earthly  Kingdom  of  God  among  the Jews, it is certainly the Kingdom of *Heaven;* for Jesus alleges that his kingdom is not of this world; and Daniel affirmed that in the days of the last worldly empire the God of heaven would set up a kingdom unlike all others then on earth; in which, as Paul teaches, men are "blessed with every spiritual blessing in heavenly places in Christ;"16 for he has raised us Jews and Gentiles, and "has set us down together in the heavenly places by Christ Jesus."17

There  is,  in  the  superior  and  heavenly  privileges  and  honors bestowed upon the citizens of this kingdom, the best reason why it should have first been presented to the world under this title, rather than  any  other;  and  for  the  same  reasons  which  influenced Matthew to usher it into notice in Judea, under this designation, we ought now to prefer it, because many of our contemporaries, like the ancient Jews, see as much of heaven and glory in the veiled grace of the Mosaic institution, as  in the unveiled grace of the Christian  kingdom.  The  pertinency  of  this  title  will  appear  still more evident as we develop the constitutional privileges of this kingdom. 

But  most  evidently  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  "*the  Kingdom  of Christ and of God.*"18 It is the kingdom of God, because he set it 

up,19 gave the constitution and King, and all the materials out of which it is erected.20 It is the kingdom of Christ, because God the 

Father gave it to him as his Son, and as the *heir of all things,* and therefore, "all that is the Father's is mine," says Jesus, "and I am his."21 *God created all things* **by** *Jesus Christ and* **for** *him.* 

Having, then, noticed the reasons for the characteristic *titles* of this kingdom,  and having already ascertained what  are the elements absolutely essential to a kingdom, distinguished from those merely circumstantial or accidental, we shall now proceed to consider in the order suggested, the Constitution, King, Subjects, Laws, and Territory of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

***Constitution*** 

God himself, after the gracious counsels of his own will, proposed and tendered the constitution of this kingdom to his own Son. This "glory he had with the father before the world was." He that was "in  the  beginning  with  God" — "*the  wisdom  and  power  of God*" — was set up from everlasting, or ever the earth was. "Then was  I  with  God,  as  one  brought  up  with  him;  I  was  daily  his 

delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him — rejoicing  in  the  habitable parts of his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men."22

Therefore, he who was to be "*ruler in Israel*" was with God in counsel "in the beginning of all his ways;" for "his goings forth were from of old, even from the day of eternity."23

It was **to do the will,** or fulfil the items of this constitution, that "*the* **word** was made flesh and dwelt among us." I came to *do the will* of him that *sent* me, and to finish "the work *given* me to do." "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to resume it; this  commandment  I  received  from  my  Father."  The  Father "commissioned and sent him forth into the world." He "came down from heaven." "Thou hast given me power over all flesh, that I might give eternal life to all that thou hast given me." 

These,  and  many  other  passages,  which  the  reader  will  easily remember,  unequivocally  evince  that  an  understanding  and agreement existed ere time began between God and the **Word** of God — or,  as  now  revealed,  between  the  **Father**  and  the  **Son**, respecting the kingdom. In consequence of which, "the *Word* was made flesh and dwelt among us" — in consequence of which "he divested himself" of his antecedent glory — "took upon him the form of  a  bond-servant" — "was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful flesh" — "took part with us in flesh and blood." In consequence of which agreement, and the promised glory, for "the joy set before him in the promise," of "seeing his seed the travail of his soul, and being satisfied," he "endured the cross, despising the shame," and was "made perfect through sufferings to lead many sons to glory." 

To  the  stipulations  concerning  eternal  life,  propounded  in  the constitution  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  frequent  allusions  are made in the Apostle's writings. Thus the believers were "elected in *him*  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  and  "eternal  life  was promised  before  the  times  of  the  ages,"  "according  to  the benevolent  purposes  which  *he  purposed  in  himself*  for  the administration  of  the  fulness  of  the  appointed  times,  to  gather together all under Christ — all in the heavens and all on the earth, under him. He formerly marked us out for an adoption through 

Jesus Christ to himself, according to his purpose, who effectually works all things according to the counsel of his will.24

From all these sayings and allusions, we must trace the constitution of this kingdom into eternity — before time began. We must date it from *everlasting,* and resolve it into the absolute gracious will of the eternal God. In reference to all the prospective developments of time, "known to God from the beginning," it proposed to make the **word**  flesh,  and  then  to  make  the  Incarnate  Word,  called Emmanuel, of Jesus Christ, the *King,* to give him all who should be reconciled to God by him for *subjects,* to put under him all the angelic hosts, and constitute him monarch of earth, *lawgiver* to the universe; and thus make him heir and Lord of all things. 

As a constitution brings all the elements of a kingdom into a new relation to one another, so it is the measure and guarantee of all the privileges, immunities, and obligations accruing to all the parties in that relation. It prescribes, arranges, and secures all the privileges, duties, obligations, honors, and emoluments of the King and the subjects. Neither of them can claim more than it stipulates and guarantees, and neither of them can rightfully be deprived of any of them. 

From the premises now before us, and the light given to us in these scriptures and those in the margin, we learn —  

***First**.* That God is the author of the constitution of the Kingdom of Heaven; that he propounded it to the **word** that was made flesh, before  the  world  was,  in  prospect  of  all  the  developments  of creation. 

***Second.*** That the **word** accepted it, because the will of God was always his delight; therefore he said, "I come to do thy will, O God!"  Hence  "*God*  has so  loved the world as to  give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but obtain eternal life." 

***Third.*** That in consequence "all *authority* in heaven and earth" was given to Jesus Christ, and all orders of intelligence subjected to 

him, that he might be *King* over all, and have the power of giving eternal life to his people.25

***Fourth**.*  That  the  earth  is  now  the  Lord's,  the  present  temporal territory of his kingdom; that the heathen people are given to him for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his possession; that all ends of the earth are his, and all dominions, kindreds, tribes, tongues, and people shall yet serve him on earth and glorify him in heaven.26

***Fifth**.* That all that he redeems are his seed — his subjects: that he will have their faith, confidence, esteem, admiration, and gratitude forever; that he will be worshipped, honored, and revered by them in a world without end: that God, angels, and saints will delight in him for ever and ever.27 He has, therefore, to raise the dead, judge the  world,  and  to  present  the  redeemed  pure,  holy,  happy,  and triumphant before his Father, and then to give up his kingdom to God. 

To  comprehend  in  any  adequate  idea,  the  constitution  of  this kingdom, we must learn more than its history, or the way in which it  was  introduced  and  propounded.  We  must  regard  all  the elements of the kingdom as *constitutional* elements — the King as constitutional King; the subjects, laws, and territory, including the ultimate  inheritance,  as  constitutional  subjects,  laws,  territory, inheritance; and, therefore, we shall speak of them in detail. 

***The King*** 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  constitutional  monarch  of  the Kingdom of Heaven. The privileges guaranteed to him in reference to the kingdom are as follows: 

As King, he is to be the *oracle* of God — to have the disposal of the Holy  Spirit — to  be  Prophet  and  High  Priest  of  the  Temple  of God — to have the throne of his Father — to be governor of all nations on  earth,  and  head  of  all  hierarchs  and  powers  in  heaven — the supreme Lawgiver, the only Savior — the resurrection and the life, the ultimate and final Judge of all, and the Heir of all things. These honors, privileges, and powers, are secured to him by the irrevocable grant of the God and Father of all; therefore, as said Isaiah, "The Lord cometh with a strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him. Behold his reward is with him, and his work before him." "I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion." "Ask of me, and  I  will  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession." "I have made him a leader  and  commander  of  the  people" — "a  light  to  the Gentiles" — "salvation to the ends of the earth" — "a Priest forever after the order of Melchisedeck," "Sit thou at my right hand till I make thy foes thy footstool." "The government shall be upon his shoulders." "All things are delivered to me by my Father." "He is Lord of the dead and living." "Angels, authorities, and powers are subjected to him." "The Father gave the Spirit without measure to him." "He received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit." "The kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the governor among the nations." "He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the Euphrates to the ends of the earth." "They shall fear thee as long as sun  and  moon  endure  to  all  generations."  "The  Father  has committed all judgments to the Son." 

But, not to weary the reader with quotations and proofs, we shall give but another: — "Behold my servant, whom I uphold; my elect, in whom my soul delights. I have put my Spirit upon him. He shall bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth.  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be discouraged till he have set judgment in the earth; and the Isles shall  wait  for  his  law." — "I,  the  Lord,  have  called  thee  in righteousness, and will hold thy hand and keep thee, and give thee for a *covenant* of the people, for a *light* to the Gentiles — to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house."28

***The Subjects of the Kingdom*** 

They  are  all  born  again.  Their  privileges  and  honors  are  the following: —  

***First**.* Their constitutional King is the only begotten Son of God; whose  titles  and  honors  are — Image  of  the  invisible God — Effulgence  of  the  Father's  glory — Emmanuel — Upholder  of the universe — Prophet of the Prophets — High Priest of the temple of God — King  of  kings — Lord  of  lords — the  only Potentate — Commander  and  Covenant  of  the  people — Captain  of Salvation — Counsellor, Lawgiver, Redeemer, Deliverer, Mediator, Savior, Advocate, Judge. He is the Sun of Righteousness, Prince of Peace,  Lamb  of God,  Lion  of the tribe of Judah, the Root  and Offspring  of  David,  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star,  Light  of  the World,  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness,  Bishop  of  Souls,  Great Shepherd of the Sheep, Head of the Church, Lord of all, Heir of the Universe, the Resurrection and the Life, the Son of Man, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the end, the Amen, etc. etc. Such is the  Christian's  King,  whose  assistance  in  all  these  characters, offices,  and  relations,  as  exhibited,  under  all  these  figures,  is guaranteed to him in the Constitution. Indeed it is all expressed in one promise — "*I will be your God, and you shall be my people.*" 

***Second**.* It is guaranteed that "their sins and iniquities are to be remembered no more." "There is no condemnation to them who are under Christ." "Sin shall have no dominion, nor lord it over them." The Lord imputeth to them no sin. They are all pardoned, justified, and saved from sin. 

***Third**.* They are adopted into the family of God; made sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty, children of God, and heirs — joint heirs with Christ. They have an Advocate in the heavens, through whom their persons and prayers are accepted. 

***Fourth**.* They all know the Lord. "All thy children shall be taught of God." The Holy Spirit of God writes the law of God upon their hearts, and inscribes it upon their understanding: so that they need not teach every one his fellow citizen to know the Lord, "for they all know him from the least to the greatest." They are sanctified through the truth — separated and consecrated to God. 

***Fifth**.* They have the promise of a resurrection from the dead, and eternal  life;  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and unfading — new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness alone shall dwell forever. 

Such are the constitutional rights and privileges of the citizens of the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  All  these  have  obtained  for  them  the following titles and honors: — Kingdom of Heaven; Israel of God; chosen generation; body of Christ; children of God; habitation of God; family of God; Jerusalem from above; Mount Zion; peculiar people; the elect of God; holy nation; temple of the Holy Spirit; house of God; city of the living God; pillar and ground of the truth; living stones; seed of Abraham; citizens of heaven; lights of the world; salt of the earth; heirs of God; joint heirs with Christ, etc. 

The privileges, honors, and emoluments belong to every citizen of the Kingdom of Heaven. Indeed, they are all comprehended in the summary  which  Paul  (from  Jeremiah)  lays  before  the  believing Hebrews: — "This  is  the  constitution  which  I  will  make  with  the house of Israel for those days: I will put my laws into their mind, and inscribe them upon their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. And they shall not teach every man his fellow citizen, and every man his brother, saying, Know the  Lord; for all shall  know me, from  the least  of them to  the greatest  of  them;  because  I  will  be  merciful  to  their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more."29 To this summary the reader may add those scriptures in the margin, as confirmatory of the above.30

***The Laws of the Kingdom*** 

The supreme law of the kingdom is *love* — love to the King and love to each other. From this law all its religious homage and morality flow. Precepts and examples innumerable present this to the mind of all the citizens. The Kingdom of Heaven is divided into small societies, called *churches,* or *congregations of the Lord.* Each of these communities in the reception of members, in the education and discipline of them, or in excluding them when necessary, is to be governed by the apostolic instructions: for to the Apostles the Savior committed the management of his kingdom. After they had made citizens by preaching the gospel and baptizing, they were commanded to teach them to observe whatsoever the Savior had commanded them. 

These laws and usages of the Apostles must be learned from what the  Apostles  published  to  the  world,  after  the  ascension  and coronation of the King, as they are recorded in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles: for we shall see in the sequel that the gospel was fully developed, and the whole doctrine of the Reign of Christ *began* to be proclaimed in Jerusalem, on the first Pentecost after the ascension. 

The old or Jewish constitution was promulged first on Sinai on the first  Pentecost  after  the  redemption  of  Israel  from  Egyptian bondage; and from that day, and what is written after it in Exodus and Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, all the laws, manners, and  customs  authorized  by  the  national  constitution  are  to  be found.  They  are  not  to  be  sought  after  in  Genesis,  nor  in  the antecedent  economy.  Neither  are  the  statutes  and  laws  of  the Christian kingdom to be sought for in the Jewish scriptures, nor antecedent  to  the  day  of  Pentecost;  except  so  far  as  our  Lord himself, during his life time, propounded the doctrine of his reign. But of this when we ascertain the *commencement* of this kingdom. 

There is one universal law of naturalization, or for making citizens out of all nations, enjoined upon those citizens of the kingdom who are  engaged  in  the  work  of  proselytism;  but  the  laws  of  this kingdom, like the laws of every other kingdom, are obligatory only on the citizens. 

The weekly celebration of the death and resurrection of Jesus, and the weekly meeting of the disciples of Christ for this purpose, and for the edification of one another in their most holy faith, are the only positive statutes of the kingdom; and, therefore, there is no law, statute, or observance in this kingdom, that in the least retards its extension from East to West, from North to South, or that can prevent its progress in all nations of the world. 

It  is,  however,  worthy  of  observation,  that  every  part  of  the Christian  worship,  in  the  small  communities  spread  over  the territory of the Kingdom of Heaven, like so many candlesticks in a large edifice, are designed to enlighten and convert the world; and, therefore, in all the meetings of the family of God, they are to keep this supremely in view; and to regard themselves as the "pillar and ground of the truth." 

Concerning the details of the laws of the kingdom, we cannot now speak  particularly.  "The  favor  of  God  which  brings  salvation, teaches all the citizens of heaven, that, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, they should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this  present  world,  expecting  the  blessed  hope — namely,  the appearing of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works."  These  things  the  Bishops  of  every  community  should teach and enforce; for such is the spirit, and such is the object of all the laws and statutes of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

***The Territory of the Kingdom*** 

In all other kingdoms, except the Kingdom of Heaven, the territory is  the  national  domain  and  inheritance.  It  was  so  in  the  first Kingdom  of  God  under  the  constitution  from  Sinai.  But  in  the typical kingdom they lived at a distance from their inheritance for one generation. During these forty  years, in which they pitched their tents in the wilderness, *God was their inheritance.* He rained bread from heaven upon them, and sent them flesh upon the east wind. He made the flinty rock Horeb a living spring, whose stream followed them all the way to Jordan. He renewed their garments every day, so that for forty years they grew not old, not needed a single patch. A pillar of fire by night and a cloud by day guided them towards Canaan, the land of their inheritance. 

The whole earth is the present territory of the Kingdom of Heaven, but the new heavens and earth are to be its *inheritance.* The earth, indeed, is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; but the children of God and the children of the wicked one — the *wheat* and the *darnel,* are both planted in it, and must grow till the harvest. The righteous have their bread and water guaranteed to them while they live; for "godliness is profitable to all things, having *promise of the life that now is,* as well as of that which is to come." But the joint heirs of Christ  are  never  taught  to  regard  the  earth  as  their  inheritance. They may indeed, say, though poor and penniless, "All things are ours; whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come — all are ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is God's." But, like the Jews on their journey to Canaan,  "they  seek  a  better  country" — "they  seek  a  city  yet  to come." "My kingdom," says Jesus, "is not of this world." And, therefore, in the world, Christians are strangers and pilgrims, and may expect tribulation. 

There earth is the present *theatre of war;* therefore all Christians in the territory are *soldiers.* Their expenses, their rations are allowed, the  arms  and  munitions  of  war  are  supplied  them  from  the magazines  in  Mount  Zion,  the  strong  hold  and  fortress  of  the kingdom; where the King, the heads of departments, and all the legions of angels are resident. So that on entering the Army of the Faith every soldier is panoplied with the armor of God; and when inducted into the heavenly tactics under the Captain of Salvation, he is expected to be a good soldier of Jesus Christ, and to fight the good fight of faith courageously and victoriously. 

The Kingdom of Heaven on this territory is greatly opposed by the kingdom of Satan, which ever seeks to make an *inheritance* out of the  territory  of  the  militant  kingdom  of  righteousness;  and therefore, the citizens have not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world — with  spiritual wickedness in high places. 

Ever since the commencement of this kingdom, the governments of this world have either been directly opposed to it, or at best, pretended friends; and therefore their influence has always been opposed to the true Spirit and genius of the Christian institution. Christians  have  nothing  to  expect  from  them  except  liberty  of conscience and protection from violence, while leading peaceable and  quiet  lives,  in  all  godliness  and  honesty,  till  Jesus  take  to himself his great power, and hurl all these potentates from their thrones and make his cause triumphant — a consummation devoutly to be wished, and which cannot now be regarded as far distant. 

***Manner and Customs of the Kingdom*** 

Touching *the manners and customs* of the Kingdom of Heaven, they are such as generally obtained in the land of Judea and in the East  at  the  time  of  its  erection:  or,  rather,  they  are  the  simple manners  and  customs  of  the  *family  worship  age*  of  the  world. These are consecrated by simply performing them with a regard to Jesus Christ, or from the motives prompted by the doctrine of the Reign of Heaven. As we treat our natural brothers and sisters in public  and  in  private — as  we  address,  salute,  and  converse  with them — as we transact all family business, and conduct the affairs of the household — so are Christians to treat one another. There is no other  virtue  or  utility  in  these,  than  as  they  cherish  brotherly kindness and love, and are regarded to the Lord. 

***Induction into the Kingdom of Heaven*** 

Into  every  kingdom,  human  or  divine,  there  is  a  legal  door  of admission. That is, in the statute book of Heaven, called a *birth.* Into  the  kingdom  of  nature  we  are  born.  Into  the  future  and ultimate kingdom of glory we enter, soul and body, by being born from the grave. As Christ, the first born from the dead, entered the heavenly  kingdom,  so  must  all  his  brethren.  And  as  to  this kingdom of which we speak, as now existing in this world, Jesus himself taught that into it no person can legally enter who is not born again, or "*born of water and the Spirit.*"31 The analogy is 

complete between the kingdoms of nature — of grace — and of glory. Hence we have natural birth, metaphorical or spiritual birth, and supernatural birth. There is a being born of the flesh — born of the Spirit — born of the grave; and there is a kingdom for the flesh — a kingdom for the Spirit — and a kingdom for the glorified man. 

This second, or new birth, which inducts into the Kingdom of God, is always subsequent to a death and burial, as it will be into the everlasting kingdom of glory. It is indeed, a literal death and burial before a literal resurrection, into the heavenly and eternal kingdom. It is also a metaphorical or figurative death and burial, before the figurative resurrection or new birth into the Kingdom of Heaven. Water  is  the  element  in  which  this  burial  and  resurrection  are performed, according to the constitutional laws of the Kingdom of Heaven.  Hence  Jesus  connects  the  water  and  the  Spirit  when speaking of entering the Kingdom of God. 

In  naturalizing  aliens,  the  commandment  of  the  King  is first — submit to them the Constitution, or preach to them *the gospel of the kingdom,* Soon as they understand and believe this, and are desirous of being translated into the Kingdom  of Christ and of God, that "they many receive the remission of sins and inheritance among all that are sanctified," they are to be buried in water into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and raised out of it confessing their death to sin, their faith in Christ's sacrifice and resurrection: and thus they are born of water and the Spirit, and constituted citizens of the kingdom of heaven. *To as many as thus receive him he gives privilege to become the children of God;* for they are "*born of God*" — born of *God,* when born of water and the Spirit, because this is the institution of God. 

In these days of apostasy men have sought out many inventions. Some have attempted to get into the Kingdom of Heaven without being  born  at  all.  Others  imagine  that  they  can  be  born  of  the Spirit, without water, and that the king is well pleased with them who have been born without a mother, as those who are lawfully born  of  father  and  mother.  Others  think  that  neither  Spirit  nor water is necessary; but if they are politically born of the flesh, they can  enter  the  kingdom  as  rightfully  as  the  Jewish  circumcised infants enter the earthly kingdom of Israel. But as we have no faith in any modern improvements of the gospel, change or amendment of the constitution of the Kingdom of Heaven, we must leave them to account to the King himself, who "*have transgressed the law, changed the ordinance, and broken the everlasting covenant;*"32 and proceed to the question, “When did the Kingdom of Heaven commence?” (See next essay) 

4. The Coming of the Kingdom 

When did the Kingdom of Heaven commence? "With the ministry of John," says  one:  "With the ministry of Jesus," says  another: "With the first sending out of the Twelve Apostles," says a third: "At the resurrection of Jesus," says a fourth: "At none of them; but by degrees from the baptism of John till the fall of Jerusalem," says a fifth. 

The  reader  will  please  remember  that  there  are  at  least  *five elements* essential to a perfectly organized kingdom, and that it may  be  contemplated  in  reference  to  one  or  more  of  these component parts. Hence the numerous and various parables of the Savior. Sometimes he speaks of the administration of its affairs — of its  principles  in  the  heart — of  its  subjects — of  its  King — of  its territory — of its progress — of various incidents in its history. Hence the parable of the sower — of wheat and darnel — of the leaven — of the merchant seeking goodly pearls — of the grain of mustard seed — of the  sweep  net — of  the  marriage  of  a  king's  son — of  a  nobleman going into a far country — of the ten virgins — of the talents — of the sheep and goats, present to our view the Kingdom of Heaven in different  attitudes,  either  in  its  elements  or  in  its  history — its commencement or its close. 

The  approaching  or  the  coming  of  the  Reign  of  Heaven,  can properly  have  respect  only  to  one  or  two  of  the  elements  of  a kingdom; or to the formal exhibition of that whole organization of society which we call *a kingdom.* It can have no proper allusion to its  territory;  for  that  was  created  and  located  before  man  was created. It cannot allude either to the persons who were constituted subjects,  for  they  too  were  in  existence  before  the  kingdom commenced. It cannot allude to the birth or baptism of the King, for  it  was  not  till  after  these  that  Jesus  *began*  to  proclaim  its coming or approach. It cannot have reference to the ministry of John  or  of  Jesus,  any  more  than  to  the  patriarchal  or  Jewish dispensations; because Jesus did not begin to proclaim the coming of this reign *till after John was cast into prison.* This is a fact of so much importance, that Matthew, Mark, and  Luke distinctly and substantially  declare,  that,  in  conformity  to  ancient  predictions, Jesus was to  begin  to  proclaim  in  *Galilee,* and  *that he did  not commence to proclaim the doctrine or the gospel of the coming of the Reign, till after John's ministry ceased and he was cast into prison.* In this assertion the Evangelists agree: "Now Jesus hearing that  John  was  imprisoned,  retired  into  Galilee;  and  having  left Nazareth, resided at Capernaum. For thus saith the Prophet," etc. From that time Jesus *began* to proclaim, saying, "Reform for the Reign of Heaven approaches;" or, "The Kingdom of Heaven is at hand," as says the common version.33

Some  Baptists,  for  the  sake  of  *immersion,*  and  some  of  our brethren  in  the  Reformation,  for  the  sake  of  *immersion  for  the remission of sins,* seem desirous to have John in the Kingdom of Heaven,  and  to  date  the  commencement  of  the  Christian dispensation with the first appearance of John the Immerser. They allege in support of this hypothesis that Jesus said, "The Law and the Prophets continued till John," (the only instructors of men;) "since that time the Kingdom of God is preached, and every man presses into it." "Publicans and harlots show you the way into the Kingdom of Heaven," said Jesus to the Pharisees. Again, "Alas! for  you  Scribes  and  Pharisees!  for  you  shut  the  Kingdom  of Heaven against men, and will neither enter yourselves, nor permit others that would to enter." "The Kingdom of God is within you." "The  Kingdom  of  Heaven  has  overtaken  you."  From  these premises they infer that the Kingdom of Heaven was actually set up  by  John  the  Baptist:  "For,"  say  they,  "how  could  men  and women *enter into a kingdom* which was not set up? And did not John  immerse  for  the  remission  of  sins,  and  call  upon  men  to repent and reform in order to baptism?" 

The  Paidobaptists,  too,  will  have  Abraham,  Isaac,  and  Jacob, Moses, David, and all the circumcised Jews in the Kingdom of Heaven,  because  Jesus  said,  "Before  Abraham  was,  I  am;" "Abraham  saw  my  day  and  was  glad;"  and  Paul  says  Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt, and forsook Egypt in faith of the Christian recompense of reward. Yes, and Paul affirms that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob and their families, who dwelt in tents in the promised land, looked not only to the rest in Canaan, but they sought a heavenly country, and expected the city of foundations, whose builder and maker is God. Thus  the  Jews  had  Christ  in  the  manna  and  in  the  rock,  and baptism in the cloud and in the sea. 

The  mistake  is  specifically  the  same.  Christ  was  promised  and prefigured  before  he  came,  and  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  was promised and preached  by John, by Jesus,  the Twelve, and the Seventy,  (who  went  about  proclaiming  the  glad  tidings  of  the Reign),  before  the  Reign  of  Christ,  or  Kingdom  of  Heaven commenced. Because Christ was promised and prefigured in the patriarchal  and  Jewish  ages,  the  Paidobaptists  will  have  the Kingdom of Heaven on earth since the days of Abel; and because the  glad  tidings  of  the  Reign  and  Kingdom  of  Heaven  and  the principles  of  the  new  and  heavenly  order  of  society  were promulged by John, the Baptists will have John the Baptist in the Kingdom of Heaven, and the very person who set it up. 

Let us, then, examine this matter with all candor: and first, we shall place  the  passages  above  quoted  out  of  the  testimonies  of  the Evangelists on one side, and the following passages on the other side; and then see if we can reconcile them. John says, "Reform, for the Reign of God approaches." Jesus began to proclaim, saying "Reform, for the Reign or Kingdom of Heaven is at hand." He also commanded the Twelve and the Seventy to peregrinate all Judea, making  the  same  proclamation.34  Of  John  the  Baptist  he  said, 

though greater than all the Prophets, "The least in the Kingdom of Heaven is greater than he." 

Thus,  after  John  was  beheaded,  we  have  some  eighty-four preachers  daily  proclaiming  the  nigh  approach  of  the  Reign  of God; and Jesus often assuring his disciples that the Kingdom of God was soon to appear, and that some of his companions would see  him  enter  upon  his  Reign  before  they  died — and  yet  the Kingdom was set up by John! Scribes and Pharisees were shutting the kingdom against men, when Jesus had only given the keys to Peter! John the Baptist was in the kingdom, and the least in the kingdom  is  greater  than  he!  More  than  eighty  preachers  say, "Reform, for the Reign of Heaven is at hand;" and John the Baptist before he died, introduced all Judea and Jerusalem into it! How, then, shall we reconcile these apparent contradictions? Make both sides figurative, and it may be done. Regard both sides literally, and it cannot be done! To say that the kingdom came in one point of view at one time, and in another point of view at another time, is only  to  say  that  it  came  in  different  senses — literally  and figuratively. For our part, we must believe that the Kingdom of Heaven  began,  or  the  Reign  of  Heaven  literally  and  truly commenced in one day. 

Many of its principles were developed by the ancient Prophets; David,  Isaiah,  and  others  wrote  much  concerning  it;  John  the Baptist  proclaimed  its  immediate  and  near  approach,  and  more fully developed its spiritual design; therefore he was superior to them.  Jesus  often  unfolded  its  character  and  design  in  various similitudes;  and  every  one  who  understood  and  received  these *principles* was said to "press into the kingdom," or to have "the kingdom  within  them;"  and  wherever  these  principles  were promulged, "the Kingdom of Heaven" was said to "come nigh" to the people, or to have "overtaken them;" and those who opposed these principles and interposed their authority, to prevent others from receiving them, were said to "shut the Kingdom of Heaven against men;" and thus all these scriptures must of necessity be understood  from  the  contexts  in  which  they  stand:  for  it  is impossible that the Reign of Heaven could literally commence "*till Jesus was glorified,*" "received the promise of the Holy Spirit," was "made Lord and Christ," and "sat down with his Father upon the throne" — for he left the earth *to receive a kingdom.*35

To make this, if possible, still more evident, we ask *When did the Kingdom  of  God,  established  by  Moses  amongst  the  seed  of Abraham, cease?* This question penetrates the whole nature and necessity of the case: for will any one suppose that there were two Kingdoms of God on earth at one and the same time? Certainly the one ceased before the other began. 

Now,  that  the  kingdom  of  God,  ministered  by  Moses,  had  not ceased during the personal ministry of the Messiah on earth, is, we think, abundantly evident from the following facts and documents: 

***First.*** Jesus was to have appeared, and did appear, "*in the end of the  world,*"  or  last  days  of  the  first  Kingdom  of  God.  "In  the conclusion  of  the  age  has  he  appeared  to  put  away  sin  by  the sacrifice of himself." The "world to come" was one the names of the gospel age. He has not subjected "the world to come" to angels, as he did the world past, says Paul to the Hebrews. He appeared, then, not in the beginning of the gospel age, but in the end of the Jewish age. 

***Second**.* The Temple was the house of God to the very close of the life of Jesus. For it was not till the Jewish ministry conspired to kill him  that  he  deserted  it.  At  the  last  festival  of  his  life,  and immediately before he fell into their hands, on walking out of the Temple, he said, "Behold your house is deserted, for you shall not see me henceforth till you shall say, Blessed be he that comes in the name of the Lord!" It was his Father's house, the house of God, till that moment. Then, indeed, the glory departed. 

***Third**.* The Jewish offerings and service, as a divine institution, continued  till  the  condemnation  of  Jesus.  He  sent  the  cleansed leper to the priest to make the offering commanded in the law. He commanded the people to hear the doctors of the law who sat in Moses' chair. He paid the didrachma. He was a minister of the circumcision. He lived *under,* not *after* the law. He kept all its ordinances, and caused all his disciples to regard it in its primitive import and authority to the last passover. *Indeed, it could not be disannulled, for it was not consummated till on the cross he said,* "**it is finished**." 

***Fourth**.* When he visited Jerusalem the last time, and in the last parable  pronounced  to  them,  he  told  them  plainly  that  "the Kingdom of God should be taken from them" and given to a nation who  should  make  a  better  use  of  the  honors  of  the  kingdom; consequently at the time the Jews had the Kingdom of God. ***Fifth**.* It was not until his death that the veil of the Temple was rent; that the things "which could be shaken were shaken." It was then, and not till then, that he nailed the legal institution to the cross. Then, and not  till  then, was  the middle  wall of partition broken down. The last Sabbath he slept in the grave.  *From the moment of his death there was no life in the old Kingdom of God.* The Temple was deserted, its veil rent, its foundation shaken, the city  devoted,  the  ritual  abolished,  and  as  after  death  the judgment — the Temple, city, and nation waited for the day of his vengeance. 

The Kingdom of God was evidently in the Jewish institution till Jesus died. Hence the Kingdom of Heaven came not while Jesus lived. In anticipation, they who believed the gospel of the kingdom received the Kingdom of God, just as in anticipation he said, "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do" before he began to suffer; and as he said, "This cup is the new testament in my blood, shed for the remission of the sins of many," before it was shed. So while the doctrines of this reign — faith, repentance, baptism,  and  a  new  principle  of  sonship  to  Abraham  were promulging by John, the Twelve, the Seventy, and by Himself, the Kingdom  of  Heaven  was  approaching;  and  those  who  received these  principles  by  anticipation  were  said  to  enter  into  the kingdom, or to have the kingdom within them. 

The principles of any reign or revolution are always promulged, debated, and canvassed before a new order of things is set up. A party is formed upon these principles before strength is acquired, or a leader obtained competent to the commencement of a new order of things. In society, as in nature, we have first the blade, next the stem, and then the ripe corn in the ear. We call it wheat, or we call it corn, when we have only the promise in the blade. By such a figure of speech, the Kingdom of God was spoken of, while as yet only its principles were promulging. 

When these American states were colonial subjects of the king of England, and long before the setting up of a republic, republican doctrines  were  promulged  and  debated.  The  believers  and advocates of these doctrines were called republicans, while as yet there  was  not  a  republic  on  this  continent.  He  who  dates  the commencement of the Kingdom of Heaven from the ministry of John the Baptist sympathizes with him who dates the American republics from the first promulgation of the republican principles, or from the formation of a republican party in the British colonies. But as a faithful and intelligent historian, in writing the history of the American republics, commences with the history of the first promulgation  of  these  principles,  and  records  the  sayings  and deeds of the first promulgers of the new doctrines; so the sacred historians began their history of the Kingdom of Heaven with the appearance  of  John  in  the  wilderness  of  Judea,  preaching  the Messiah, faith, repentance, a holy life, and *raising up a new race of Israelites on the principle of faith rather than of flesh;* for this in truth was the "blade" of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

Having from all these considerations seen that until the death of the Messiah his kingdom *could not* commence; and having seen from  the  record  itself  that  it  *did  not*  commence  before  his resurrection,  we  proceed  to  the  development  of  things  after  his resurrection, to ascertain the day on which this kingdom was set up, or the Reign of Heaven began. 

The  writer  to  whom  we  are  most  indebted  for  an  orderly  and continued narrative of the affairs of the Kingdom of Heaven is the Evangelist Luke. His history begins with the angelic annunciations of the nativity of John and Jesus, and ends with the appearance of the great standard-bearer of the Cross in Imperial Rome, A. D. 64. That part of the history to which we now look as a guide, to the affairs of the commencement of the Reign, is the notices which he makes of the *forty days* which the Lord spent in his crucified body, previous to his ascension. The reader ought not to be told (for he ought to know) that Jesus rose in the same body in which he was crucified, and in the reanimated fleshly body did eat, drink, and converse with his Apostles and friends for forty days. That body was not changed till, like the living saints who shall be on the earth at his second personal coming, it was made spiritual, incorruptible and glorious at the instant of his ascension. So that the man Christ Jesus  was  make  like  to  all  his  brethren  in  his  death,  burial, resurrection,  transfiguration,  ascension,  and  glorification;  or, rather, they shall be made to resemble him in all these respects. 

The  Apostles  testify  that  they  saw  him  ascend — that  a  cloud received him out of their sight — that angels descended to inform them that he was taken up into heaven, not to return for a long time — that he ascended far above the visible heavens, and now fills all things. Stephen, when dying, saw him standing on the right hand of God. 

Much attention is due to all the incidents of these forty days — as much at least, as to the forty days spent by Moses in the Mount with God in the affairs of the preceding Kingdom of God. For the risen Messiah makes the affairs of his approaching kingdom the principal topic of these forty days.36 Towards the close of these days,  and  immediately  before  his  ascension,  he  gave  the commission  to  his  Apostles  concerning  the  setting  up  of  this kingdom. "All authority in heaven and in earth is given to me: go, *therefore,*" said he, "convert the nations," "immersing them into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe *all the things* which I have commanded you; and, behold! I am with you always, even to the conclusion of this state."37 "But continue in the city of Jerusalem until you be invested with power from on high." Thus according to his promise and the ancient prophecy, it was to "begin at Jerusalem."38

The  risen  Savior  thus  directs  our  attention  to  Jerusalem  as  the *place,* and to a period distant "not many days" as the *time,* of the beginning of his reign. The great facts of the death, burial, and resurrection of Jesus, not being yet fully developed to his Apostles, they were not qualified to take any steps to the setting up of a kingdom  which was  to  be  *founded upon Christ  crucified.*  They needed an interpreter of these facts, and a supernatural advocate of the pretensions of the King, before they could lay the foundation of his kingdom.  

Again,  the  King  himself  must  be  glorified  before  his  authority could be established on earth; for till he received the promise of the Spirit from his Father, and was placed on his throne, the Apostles could  not  receive  it;  so  that  Christ's  ascension  to  heaven,  and coronation were indispensable to the commencement of this Reign of Heaven. 

Here let us pause for a moment — leave the earth, and on the wings of  faith  in  the  testimony  of  Prophets  and  Apostles,  the  two witnesses for Jesus, let us follow him to heaven and ascertain his reception into the heaven of heavens, and exaltation to the right hand of God. 

***The Ascension of the Messiah*** 

Prophets and Apostles must now be heard. David, by the Spirit, says, "The chariots of God are twenty thousand, even thousands of angels; the Lord is among them as in Sinai in the holy place. Thou hast ascended on high; thou hast led captivity captive; thou has received gifts for men; yea, for the rebellious, that the Lord God might dwell among them."39 The same Prophet in speaking of the solemn and joyful procession at the carrying up of the ark of the ancient constitution to Mount Zion, turns his eye from the type to the antitype, and thus describes the entrance of the Messiah into Heaven: — "Who shall ascend into the hill of God?" The attendant angels  in  the  train  of  the  Messiah,  approaching  the  heaven  of heavens, shout, "Lift up your heads, O you gates! be lift up, you everlasting doors, and the King of  glory shall  come in." Those within, filled with astonishment that any one should so confidently demand admission into those gates so long barred against the sons of men, responsive shout, "Who is the King of glory?" The angels in attendance upon the Messiah reply in strains as triumphant, "The Lord,  strong  and  mighty!  the  Lord,  mighty  in  battle!"  and  still more  exultingly  triumphant,  shout,  "Lift  up  your  heads,  O  you gates! even lift them up, you everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in. Who is the King of glory? He is the Lord of hosts! he is the King of glory!"40

***Coronation of the Messiah*** 

Every thing in its proper place. He that ascended first descended. Jesus died, was buried, raised from the dead, ascended, and was crowned Lord of all. In the presence of all the heavenly hierarchs, the  four  living  creatures,  the  twenty-four  seniors,  and  ten thousands times ten thousand angels, he presents himself before the throne. So soon as the First Born from the dead appears in the palace  royal  of  the  universe,  his  Father  and  his  God,  in  his inaugural address, when anointing him Lord of all, says, "Let all the angels of God worship him" — "Sit thou at my right hand, till I make thy enemies thy footstool." "Jehovah shall send out of Zion the rod of thy strength: rule thou in the midst of thine enemies, "Thy people, willing in the day of thy power, shall come to thee. In the beauty of holiness, more than the womb of the morning, shalt thou have the dew of thy progeny. The Lord hath sworn, and will not  repent.  Thou  art  a  Priest  forever  after  the  order  of Melchisedeck.  The  Lord  at  thy  right  hand  shall  strike  through kings  in  the  day  of  his  wrath."  "Thy  throne,  O  God,  endures forever: the sceptre of thy kingdom is a sceptre of rectitude. Thou hast  loved  righteousness  and  hated  iniquity;  therefore  God,  thy God, has anointed thee with the oil of joy above thy fellows. Thou Lord in the beginning hast laid the foundations of the earth, and the heavens  are  the  works  of  thy  hand:  they  shall  perish,  but  thou remainest; and they shall all grow old as does a garment, and as a vesture, shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed: but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail."41

Thus God highly exalted him, and did set him over all the works of his hands, and gave him a name and an honor above every name in heaven and on earth, that at the name of Jesus glorified every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess, to the glory of God. 

"Now we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, that he might taste death for all, on account of the sufferings of death, crowned with glory and honor" — Now "angels, authorities, principalities, and powers are subjected to him." "His enemies will I clothe with shame, but upon himself shall his crown flourish." 

The Holy Spirit sent down by Jesus from heaven, on the Pentecost after his resurrection, to the disciples in attendance in Jerusalem, informs  the  Apostles  of  all  that  had  been  transacted  in  heaven during the week after his ascension, and till that day. Peter now filled with that promised Spirit, informs the immense concourse assembled on the great day of Pentecost, that God had made that Jesus whom they had crucified both Lord and Christ — exalted him a **Prince** and a Savior to grant repentance to Israel and remission of sins. 

The first act of his reign was the bestowment of the Holy Spirit, according to the Prophecy of Joel and his own promise. So soon as he received the kingdom from God his Father, he poured out the blessings of his favor upon his friends; he fulfilled all his promises to the Apostles, and *forgave three thousand of his fiercest enemies.* He received pardons and gifts for them that did rebel, and shed forth abundantly all spiritual gifts on the little flock to whom it pleased  the  Father  to  give  the  kingdom.  Thus  commenced  the Reign of Heaven, on the day of Pentecost, in the person of the Messiah,  the  Son  of  God,  and  the  anointed  Monarch  of  the universe.  Under  him  his  people,  saved  from  their  sins,  have received a kingdom which cannot be shaken nor removed. 

But  as  the  erection  of  the  Jewish  tabernacle,  after  the commencement  of  the  first  Kingdom  of  God,  was  the  work  of some time, and of united and combined effort, on the part of those raised up and qualified for the work; so was the complete erection of the new temple of God. The Apostles, as wise master builders, laid  the  foundation — promulged  the  constitution,  laws,  and institutions of the King, and raised the standard of the kingdom in many  towns,  cities,  and  countries,  for  the  space  of  forty  years. Some of them not only saw "the Son of Man enter upon his reign," and the Kingdom of God commence on Pentecost, and carry his conquests over Judea, Samaria, and the uttermost parts of the earth; but they saw the Lord "come with power" and awful glory, and accomplish all his predictions on the deserted and devoted temple, city  and  people.  Thus  they  saw  a  bright  display  of  the  golden sceptre of his grace in forgiving those who bowed to his authority, and an appalling exhibition of the iron rod of his wrath in taking vengeance on his enemies who would not have him to reign over them. 

***Present Administration of the Kingdom of Heaven*** 

During the personal absence of the King, he has committed the management  of  this  kingdom  to  stewards.  These  were  first Apostles; next to them, Prophets; next, teachers; then, assistants, or helpers;  then  directors  or  presidents,  all  furnished  with  gifts, knowledge,  and  character,  suited  to  their  respective  functions. Besides these, many persons possessed of miraculous powers — gifts of  healing  and  speaking  foreign  languages,  were  employed  in setting up  and putting  in order the  communities composing  the Kingdom  of  Heaven.  Angels  also  were  employed,  and  are  still employed, under the great King in administering to them who are heirs of salvation. For Jesus now, as Lord of all, has the Holy Spirit at his disposal, and all the angels of God; and these are employed by him in the affairs of the kingdom.42

The  Apostles  were  plenipotentiaries  and  ambassadors  for  Jesus, and  had  all  authority  delegated  to  them  from  the  King.  Hence every thing was first taught and enjoined by them. They were the first preachers, teachers, pastors, overseers, and ministers in the kingdom, and had the direction and management of all its affairs.43

The communities collected and set in order by the Apostles were called the *congregation of Christ,* and all these taken together are sometimes called *the Kingdom of God.* But the phrases "church of God," or "congregation of Christ," and the phrases "Kingdom of Heaven"  or  "Kingdom  of  God,"  do  not  always  nor  exactly represent the same thing. The elements of the Kingdom of Heaven, it will be remembered, are not simply its subjects, and therefore not simply the congregations of disciples of Christ. But as these communities possess the oracles of God, are under the laws and institutions of the King, and therefore enjoy the blessings of the present salvation, they are in the records of the Kingdom, regarded as the only constitutional citizens of the Kingdom of Heaven; and to them exclusively belongs *all the present salvation.* Their King is now in heaven, but present with them by his Spirit in their hearts and in all the institutions of his kingdom. 

Every immersed believer, of good behavior, is, by the constitution, a free and full citizen of the Kingdom of Heaven, and entitled to all the social privileges and honors of that kingdom. Such of these as meet together statedly in one place in obedience to the King, or his ambassadors the Apostles, for the observance of all the institutions of the King, compose a family, or house, or congregation of Christ; and all these families or congregations, thus organized, constitute the  present  Kingdom  of  God  in  this  world.  So  far  the  phrases *Kingdom of Heaven* and *the congregation* or *body of Christ* are equivalent in signification.44

Now in gathering these communities, and in setting them in order, the Apostles had, when alive, and when dead, by their writings still have, the sole right of legislating, ordering, and disposing of all things.  But  it  is  not  the  will  of  Jesus  Christ,  because  it  is  not adapted to human nature, nor to the present state of his kingdom as administered in his absence, that the church should be governed by a *written* document alone. Hence in every city, town, and country where the Apostles gathered a community by their own personal labors, or by their assistants,  in  setting them in order, for their edification, and for their usefulness and influence in this world, they uniformly appointed elders, or overseers to labor in the word and  teaching,  and  to  preside  over  the  whole  affairs  of  the community. To these also were added *deacons,* or public *ministers* of  the  congregation,  who,  under  the  direction  of  the  overseers, were to manage all the affairs of these individual families of God. This  the  very  names  *Bishop*  and  *Deacon,*  and  all  qualifications enjoyed, fairly and fully import. 

But as all the citizens of the kingdom are free men under Christ they all have a voice in the selection of the persons whom the Apostles  appoint  to  the  offices.  The  Apostles  still  appoint  all persons so elected, possessing the qualifications which they *by the Holy Spirit* prescribed. *And if a congregation will not elect to these offices  the  persons  possessing  these  qualifications;  or  if  by  a waywardness and selfishness of their own, they should elect those unqualified,  and  thus  disparage  those  marked  out  by  the possession of those gifts; in either case, they despise the authority of the* *Ambassadors of Christ and must suffer for it.* It is, indeed, the Holy Spirit, and not the congregations, which creates Bishops and Deacons. The Spirit gives the qualifications, both natural and acquired; and, speaking to the congregations in the written oracles, commands their ordination or appointment to the work.45

In the present administration of the Kingdom of God, *faith is the* **principle**, *and ordinances the* **means** *of all spiritual enjoyment.* Without faith in the testimony of God, a person is without God, without  Christ,  and  without  hope  in  the  world.  A  Christless universe, as respects spiritual life and joy, is the most perfect blank which fancy can create. Without faith, nothing in the Bible can be enjoyed; and without it, there is to man no Kingdom of Heaven in all the dominions of God. 

In the kingdom of nature *sense* is the *principle,* and *ordinances* the *means,*  of  enjoyment.  Without  sense,  or  sensation,  nothing  in nature can be known or enjoyed. All the creative, recuperative, and renovating  power,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  God,  exhibited  in nature, are contained in ordinances. The sun, moon, and stars — the clouds, the air, the water, the seasons, day and night, are therefore denominated  the  *ordinances*  of  heaven,  because  God's  power, wisdom, and goodness are *in* them, and felt by us only *through* them.46  Now  sense,  without  the  ordinances  of  nature,  like  faith without  the  ordinances  of  religion,  would  be  no  *principle*  of enjoyment; and the ordinances of nature, without sense, would be no *means* of enjoyment. These are the unalterable decrees of God. There is no exception to them; and there is no reversion of them. To illustrate and enforce the doctrine of this single paragraph is worthy  of  a  volume.  The  essence,  the  whole  essence  of  that reformation for which we contend, is wrapped up in this decree as above expressed. If it be true, the ground on which we stand is firm and unchangeable as the Rock of Ages; if it be false, we build upon the sand. *Reader, examine it well!* 

In  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  faith  is,  then,  the  *principle,*  and ordinances  the  *means*  of  enjoyment;  because  all  the  wisdom; power,  love,  mercy,  compassion,  or  *grace  of  God,*  is  in  the ordinances of the Kingdom of Heaven; and if all grace be in them, it can only be enjoined through them. What, then, under the present administration  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  are  the  ordinances which  contain  the  grace  of  God?  They  are  preaching  the gospel — immersion  in  the  name  of  Jesus,  into  the  name  of  the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit — the reading and teaching  the  Living  Oracles — the  Lord's  day — the  Lord's supper — fasting — prayer — confession  of  sins — and  praise.  To  these may  be  added  other  appointments  of  God,  such  as  exhortation, admonition, discipline, etc.: for these also are ordinances of God; and indeed all statutes and commandments are ordinances:47 but we speak not  at  present of those ordinances which concern the good order of the Kingdom, but of those which are primary means of  enjoyment.  These  primary  and  sacred  ordinances  of  the Kingdom of Heaven are the means of our individual enjoyment of the present salvation of God. 

Without the sun, there is no solar influence; without the moon, there is no lunar influence; without the stars, there is no sidereal influence; without the clouds, there can be no rain; and without the ordinances of the Kingdom of Heaven, there can be no heavenly influence  exhibited  or  felt.  There  is  a  peculiar  and  distinctive influence exerted by the sun, moon, and stars; yet they all give light. So in the ordinances of the Kingdom of Heaven — although they all agree in producing certain similar effects on the subjects of the kingdom, there is something distinctive and peculiar in each of them, so that no one of them can be substituted for another. Not one of them can be dispensed with; they are all necessary to the full enjoyment of the Reign of Heaven. 

In nature and in religion, all the blessings of God bestowed on man are properly classed under two heads. These may be called, for illustration, *antecedent* and *consequent.* The antecedent include all those blessings bestowed on man to prepare him for action and to induce him to action. The consequent are those which God bestows on  man  through  a  course  of  action  correspondent  to  these antecedent blessings. For example, all that God did for Adam in creating  for  him  the  earth  and  all  that  it  contains,  animal, vegetable, mineral; in forming him in his own image; giving him for all his physical, intellectual, and moral powers, and investing him with all the personal and real estate which elevated him above all sublunary beings,  were antecedent  to  any  act  of Adam; and these furnished him with inducements to love, honor, and obey his Creator and benefactor. All that God did for Abraham in promises and precepts before his obedience — all that he did for the Israelites in bringing them up out of Egypt, and redeeming them from the tyranny of Pharaoh, was antecedent to the duties and observances which he enjoined upon them. And all the blessings which Adam, Abraham,  the  Israelites  enjoyed  through  conformity  to  the institutions under which they were placed, were consequent upon that state of mind and course of action which the antedecent favors demanded and occasioned. *God never commanded any being to do anything, but the power and motives were derived from something God had done for him.* 

In  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  the  antecedent  blessings  are  the constitution of grace, the King, and all that he did, suffered, and sustained for our redemption. These were finished before we came upon the stage of action. This is all favor, pure favor, sovereign favor: for there can be no favor that is not free and sovereign. But the remission of our sins, our adoption into the family of God, our being  made  heirs  and  inheritors  of  the  kingdom  of  glory,  are consequent upon faith and the obedience of faith. 

Organization and life of any sort are of necessity the gifts of God; but health and continued enjoyment of life, and all its various and numerous  blessings  are  consequent  upon  the  proper  exercise  of these. He that will not breathe, eat, drink, sleep, exercise, cannot enjoy animal life. God has bestowed animal organization and life antecedent to any action of the living creature; but the creature may throw away his life by refusing to sustain it by the means essential to its preservation and comfort. 

God made but one man out of the earth, and one earthly *nature* of every sort, by a positive, direct, and immediate agency, of wisdom, power, and goodness. He gave these the power according to his own  constitution  or  *system*  of  nature,  of  reproducing  and multiplying to an indefinite extent. But still this life is transmitted, diffused, and sustained by God operating through the system of nature. So Jesus in the new creation, by his Spirit sent down from heaven  after  his  glorification,  did  by  a  positive,  direct,  and immediate  agency,  create  one  congregation,  one  mystical,  or spiritual body; and, according to the constitution or system of the Kingdom of Heaven, did give to that mystical  body, created in Jerusalem, out of the more ancient earthly Kingdom of God, the power of reproducing and multiplying to an indefinite extent. But still  this  new  and  spiritual  life  is  transmitted,  diffused  and sustained by the Spirit of God, operating through the constitution, or system of grace, ordained in the Kingdom of Heaven. 

Hence, in setting up the Kingdom of Heaven, as in setting up the kingdom of nature, there was a display of divinity, compared with every thing subsequent, properly supernatural. Hence the array of Apostles, prophets, extraordinary teachers, gifts, powers, miracles, etc. etc. But after this new mystical body of Christ was created and made, it had, and yet has, according to the system of grace under the present administration of the Kingdom of Heaven, the power of multiplying and replenishing the whole earth, *and will do it;* for as God breathed into the nostrils of Adam the spirit of life, after he had raised him out of the dust; and as he bestowed on his beloved Son Jesus, after he rose out of the water, the Holy Spirit without measure; so on the formation of the first congregation, figuratively called the *body of Christ,* Jesus did breathe into it the Holy Spirit to animate and inhabit it till he come again. The only temple and habitation on earth, since Jesus pronounced desolation on that in Jerusalem, is the body of Christ. 

Now, the first congregation of Christ, thus filled with the Spirit of God, had the power of raising other congregations of Christ; or, what is the same thing, of causing the body of Christ to grow and increase. Thus we see that other congregations were soon raised up in  Judea  and  Samaria  by  the  members  of  the  Jerusalem  body. Many  were  begotten  to  God  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  through  the members of the first congregation. And since the Spirit himself ceased  to  operate  in  all  those  splendid  displays  of  supernatural grandeur,  by  still  keeping  the  disciples  of  Christ  always  in remembrance of the things spoken by the holy Apostles, and by all the  arguments  derived  from  the  antecedent  blessings  bestowed, working in them both to will and do according to the benevolence of God, he is still causing the body of Christ to grow and increase in *stature,* as well as in knowledge and favor of God. Thus the church of Christ, inspired with his Spirit, and having the oracles and ordinances of the Reign of Heaven, is fully adequate to the conversion of the whole world, if she prove not recreant to her Lord. 

In the work of conversion, her Evangelists, or those whom she sends beyond the precincts of her weekly meetings, have, under the influence of the Spirit of God, simply to propose the constitution, or the glad tidings of the Reign, to those without; and by all the arguments which the oracles of God, and the times and occasions suggest, to beseech and persuade men to be reconciled to God, to kiss  the  Son,  to  accept  the  constitution,  to  bow  to  him  who  is ordained a Prince and a Savior to grant repentance and remission of sins to all who submit to his government. Thus they, and the congregation who sends them forth and sustains them in the work, beget  children  to  God  by  the  gospel,  and  enlarge  the  body  of Christ. 

With all these documents before us, may we not say, that, as Eve was the mother of all living, so "Jerusalem is the mother of us all?" And thus, to use the language of Paul, "Men are begotten to God by the gospel" through the instrumentality of the congregations of Christ. 

Under  the  present  administration  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  a great apostasy has occurred, as foretold by the Apostles. As the church, compared to a city, is called "Mount Zion," the apostate church  is  called  "Babylon  the  Great."  Like  Babylon  the  type, "Mystery Babylon" the antitype, is to be destroyed by a Cyrus that knows not God. She is to fall by the sword of infidels, supported by the fierce judgments of God. "The Holy City" is still trodden under  foot,  and  the  sanctuary  is  filled  with  corruptions.  It  is, indeed, a den of thieves; but strong is the Lord that judges the apostate city. Till that great and notable day of the Lord come, we cannot, from the prophetic word, anticipate a universal return to the original gospel, nor a general restoration of all the institutions of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  in  their  primitive  character;  and, consequently,  we  cannot  promise  to  ourselves  the  universal subjugation of the nations to the sceptre of Jesus. 

But were we to enter upon the consideration of the administration of the affairs of the kingdom after the fall and overthrow of the apostate city and the conversion of the Jews, we should have to launch upon a wide and tempestuous ocean, for which our slender bark is not at this time sufficiently equipped. This may yet deserve the  construction  of  a  large  vessel  in  a  more  propitious  season. Meanwhile  the  original  gospel  is  extensively  proclaimed,  and many thousands are preparing for the day of the Lord; and these are taught by the "Faithful and True Witness" that the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, and that their happiness and safety alike consist in being prepared for his second advent. 

1  These  essays  do  not  appear  in  the  order  in  which  they  were  written  and published.  We  place  the  last-written  first;  because,  in  the  natural  order  of things, general views of the nature of the Christian kingdom ought to precede the special development of its peculiar institutions. They appeared first in the form  of  *extras*  to  the  regular  series  of  the  Millennial  Harbinger;  and  as  we thought it expedient to preserve them, as much as possible, in their original form, this will apologize for several repetitions which may appear in them.  

`  `All the leading and characteristic principles of that reformation for which we plead, as far as the gospel institution is concerned, may be learned from them. Much, indeed, of the proof of some of the propositions found in these essays, lies scattered over the face of several volumes; but such a miniature view of the evidence by which they are sustained, as, in most cases, is sufficient to the conviction of the reader, will be found embodied in them. Those, however, who  may  not  be  perfectly  satisfied  with  the  arguments  offered,  must  be referred to the various discussions of these principles found in the Christian Baptist and Millennial Harbinger.  

2 Gen 4:7.  

3 Exodus 16:15-27.  

4 Gen 28:18.  

5 Gen 35:14.  

6 Job 1:4-5.  

7 Job 42:8-10.  

8 Gen 18:19.  

9 Gen 21:12.  

10 Gen 26:3-5.  

11 Jer 31:31.  

12  Men  fit  for  war  are  never  more  than  the  third  or  fourth  part  of  any population.  There  were  six  hundred  thousand  men  of  this  class  when  they came to Mount Sinai.  

13  If  the  following  passages  are  carefully  examined  and  compared,  it  will appear  that  both  these  phrases  often  represent  the  same  thing:  Matt.  3:2. Mark 1:14. Luke 4:43. —  Matt. 13:11. Mark 4:11. Luke 8:10, —  Matt. 11:11. Luke 7:28.  To  these  three  distinct  evidence  many  more  might  be  added.  What Matthew calls "the Kingdom of *Heaven,*" Mark and Luke call "the Kingdom of *God.*"  

14 See chapters 6: 33. 12: 28. 19: 24. 21: 31, 43.  

15 Matt. 21:43.  

16 Eph. 1:3.  

17 Eph. 2:6.  

18 Eph. 5:5.  

19 Dan 2:44.  

20 Jer 31:31; Jer 31:34.  

21 John 17:18.  

22 Pro 8:23-31.  

23 Mic 5:2.  

24 Eph. 1:3-12.  

25 Matt. 28:18. Luke 24:47. Matt. 11:27.  

26 Psalm 2:6-8; Psalm 72:2-18.  

27 Rev. 5:9-14; Rev. 14:1-5; Rev. 16:3-4; Rev. 21:9-27. Eph. 1:20-21.  

28 Isa 62:1-7.  

29 Heb. 8:10-13.  

30 Rom. 6:5-6; Rom. 6:14; Rom. 8:1; Rom. 8:33-39. 1 Co 6:11. Eph. 1:7; Eph. 2:6; Eph. 2:19; Eph. 2:21-22. Col. 1:13-14. 1 Pe 2:5; 1 Pe 2:7. 2 Pe 1:10-11. 1 Jn 2:2.  

31 John 3:5. Titus 3:5.  

32 Isa 24:5.  

33 Matt. 4:12. Mark 1:14. Luke 3:30; Luke 4:14.  

34 Matt. 10:7. Luke 10:1-11. When eating the last supper he distinctly said that the Reign of God was then future. Luke 22:18.  

35 Luke 19:11-15.  

36 Acts 1:3.  

37 Matt. 28:17-20. Mark 16:15. Luke 24:47-48.  

38 Isa 2:3. Mic 4:2.  

39 Psalm 68:17-18.  

40 Psalm 24:1-10 :  

41 Heb. 1:1-14  

42 1 Co 12:28. Eph. 4:11. Heb. 1:14.  

43 2 Co 3:6; 2 Co 5:18-20.  

44 Rom. 12:4-8. 1 Co 12:27. Heb. 3:6.  

45 Acts 6:2-7; Acts 14:23; Acts 20:17-36. Php 1:1. 1 Tim. 3:1-16. Titus 1:5-10. Heb. 13:7; Heb. 13:17; Heb. 13:24.  

46 Jer 31:35-36. Job 38:31-33. Jer 33:25.  

47 James 1:25.  

