Part VII:  

Concluding Addresses 

***ADDRESS TO THE CITIZENS OF THE KINGDOM.** Fellow Citizens,* 

Your rank and standing under the reign of the Prince of Peace have never  been  surpassed — indeed,  have  never  been  equaled  by  any portion of the human race. You have visions and revelations of God — his being and perfections — developments of the depths of his wisdom  and  knowledge,  of  the  counsels  of  his  grace,  and  the purposes of his  love, which  give  you an intellectual  and moral superiority  above  all  your  predecessors  in  the  Patriarchal  and Jewish ages of the world. Secrets of God, which were hid from ages and generations, have been revealed to you by the Apostles of the  Great  Apostle  and  High  Priest  of  your  confession. — What Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, Moses, David, Isaiah, Daniel, and all the Prophets, down to John the Harbinger, rejoiced to anticipate, you have realized and enjoyed. The intellectual pleasures of the highest  and  most  sublime  conceptions  of  God  and  of  Christ vouchsafed to you, so far transcend the attainments of the ancient people of God, that you are comparatively exalted to heaven, and may enjoy the days of heaven upon earth. You have a book which contains not only the charter of your privileges, but which explains a thousand mysteries in the antecedent administrations of God over all the nations of the earth. In it you have such interpretations of God's past providences in the affairs of individuals, families, and nations,  as  open  to  you  a  thousand  sources  of  rational  and sentimental enjoyment from incidents and things which puzzled and perplexed the most intelligent and highly favored of past ages. Mountains are, indeed, leveled; valleys are exalted; rough places are made plain, and crooked ways straight to your apprehension; and, from these data, you are able to form more just conceptions of the present, and more lofty anticipations of the future, than fell to the  lot  of  the  most  highly  favored  subjects  of  preceding dispensations. And, indeed, so inexhaustible are the deep and rich mines  of  knowledge  and  understanding  in  the  Christian revelations, that the most comprehensive mind in the kingdom of heaven  might  labor  in  them  during  the  age  of  a  Methuselah, constantly  enriching  itself  with  all  knowledge  and  spiritual understanding,  and  yet  leave  at  last  vast  regions  and  tracts  of thought wholly unexplored. 

But this decided superiority over the most gifted saints of former ages you unquestionably enjoy. Among all the living excellencies with which they were acquainted, they wanted a perfect model of all human excellence. Bright as were the virtues and excellencies of an Abraham, a Joseph, a David, there were dark spots, or, at least, some blemishes in their moral character. They failed to place in living form before their contemporaries, or to leave as a legacy to posterity, every virtue, grace, and excellence that adorn human nature. But you have Jesus, not only as 'the image of the invisible God,' 'an effulgence of his glory, and an exact representation of his character;' but as a man, holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sin,  exhibiting  in  the  fullest  perfection  every  excellence  which gives amiability, dignity, and glory to human character. You have motives  to  purity  and  holiness,  a  stimulus  to  all  that  is  manly, good, and excellent, from what he said and did, and suffered as the Son of Man, which would have added new charms and beauties to the most exemplary of all the saints of the olden times. 

Means  and  opportunities  of  the  highest  intellectual  and  moral enjoyments are richly bestowed on you, for which they sighed in vain: God having provided some better things for Christians than for  Jews  and  Patriarchs.  Shall  we  not,  then,  fellow  citizens, appreciate  and  use,  as  we  ought,  to  our  present  purity  and happiness, to our eternal honor and glory, the light which the Sun of  Righteousness  has  shed  so  richly  and  abundantly  on  us? Remember  that  we  stand  upon  Apostles  and  Prophets,  and  are sustained by Jesus, the light of the world, and the interpreter and vindicator of all God's ways to man in creation, providence, and redemption. All suns are stars; and he that is now to us in this life '*the Sun of Righteousness,*' in respect of the future is '*the Bright and Morning Star.*' Till the day of eternity dawn, and the day-star of immortality arise in our hearts, let us always look to Jesus. 

But it is not only the felicity of superior heavenly light, though that is most delectable to our rational nature, which distinguishes you the citizens of this kingdom; but that personal, real, and plenary remission of all sin,  which  you enjoy through the blood  of the Lamb  of  God,  bestowed  on  you  through  the  ordinances  of Christian immersion and confession of sins. 

The Jews, indeed, had sacrifices under the law, which could, and did take away ceremonial sins; and which so far absolved from the guilt  of  transgressing  that  law,  as  to  give  them  a  right  to  the continued enjoyment of the temporal and political promises of the national compact; but farther Jewish sacrifices and ablutions could not reach. — This benefit every Jew had from them. But as respected the conscience, Paul, that great commentator on Jewish sacrifice, assures us they had no power. 'With respect to the conscience,' says he, 'they could not make him who did the service perfect.' 

The entrance of the law gave the knowledge of sin. It gave names to particular sins, and 'caused the offence to abound.' The sacrifices appended to it had respect to that institution alone, and not to sin in general, nor to sin in its true and proper nature. The promise made to the patriarchs, and the sacrificial institution added to it, through faith  in  that  promise,  led  the  believing  to  anticipate  a  real sin-offering; but it appears the Jewish sacrifices had only respect to the Jewish institution, and, excepting their typical character, gave no new light to those under that economy on the subject of a true and *proper* remission of sins, through the real and bloody sacrifice of Christ. 

The Patriarch and the believing Jew, as respected a real remission of sins, stood upon the same ground; for, as has been observed, the legal  institution,  or,  as  Paul  says,  'the  supervening  of  the  law,' made no change in the apprehensions of remission, as respected the conscience. But a new age having come (for 'these ordinances for  cleaning  the  flesh  were  imposed  only  till  the  time  of reformation',)  and  Christ  having,  by  a  more  perfect  sacrifice, opened the way into the true holy places, has laid the foundation for perfecting the conscience by a real and full remission of sins, which, by the virtue of his blood, terminates not upon the flesh, but upon the conscience of the sinner. 

John, indeed, who lived at the dawn of the Reformation, preached reformation with an immersion for the remission of sins; saying that 'they should believe in him that was to come after him.' Those who believed John's gospel, and reformed, and were immersed into John's reformation, had remission of sins through faith in that was to come; but you, fellow-citizens, even in respect of the enjoyment of remission, are  greatly  advanced  above the  disciples  of John. You have been immersed, not only by the authority of Jesus, *as Lord of all,* into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy  Spirit,  but  *into  the  death*  or  sacrifice  of  Christ.  This  no disciple of Moses or of John knew anything about. This gives you an  insight  into  sin,  and  a  freedom  from  it,  *as  respects conscience* — a  peace  and  a  joy  unutterable  and  full  of  glory,  to which  both  the  disciples  of  Moses  and  of  the  Harbinger  were strangers. So that the light of the risen day of heaven's eternal Sun greatly  excels,  not  only  the  glimmerings  of  the  stars  in  the patriarchal age, and the faint light of the moon in the Jewish age, but even the twilight of the morning. 

Your new relation to the Father, to the Son, and to the Holy Spirit, into which you have been introduced by faith in the Messiah and immersion  into  his  death,  verifies,  in  respect  of  the  sense  and assurance of remission, all that John and Jesus said concerning the superiority of privilege, vouchsafed to the citizens of the kingdom of heaven. You can see your sins washed away in the blood that was shed on Mount Calvary. That which neither the highly favored John, nor any disciple of the Messiah could understand, till Jesus said '*it is finished,*' you not only clearly perceive, but have cordially embraced. You can feel, and say with all assurance, that 'the blood of Jesus Christ now cleanses you from all sin;' and that by faith you have access to the Mediator of the New Institution, and to the blood of sprinkling which speaks glad tidings to the heart. You have an Advocate with the Father; and, when conscious of any impurity,  coming  to  him  by  God,  confession  your  sins,  and supplicating pardon through his blood, you have the promise of remission. You now know how God is *just* as well as merciful, in forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin. 

But  superior  light  and  knowledge,  and  enlarged  conceptions  of God,  with  such  an  assurance  of  real  and  personal  remission  as pacifies the conscience and introduces the peace of God into the heart, are not the only distinguishing favors which you enjoy in the new relation of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, into which you are introduced under the reign of Heaven; but you are formally *adopted*  *into  the  family  of  God,*  and  constituted  the  sons  and daughters of the Father Almighty. 

To be called '*the friend of God,*' was the highest title bestowed on Abraham; to be called the friends of Christ, was the peculiar honor of the disciples of Christ, to whom he confided the secrets of his reign; but to be called 'the children of God through faith in Jesus Christ,' is not only the common honor of all Christians, but the highest honor which could be vouchsafed to the inhabitants of this earth. Such honor have you, my fellow-citizens, in being related to the only-begotten Son of God: 'For as many as received him he gave the privilege of becoming the sons of God.' These, indeed, were not descended from families of noble blood, nor genealogies of high renown; neither are they the offspring of the instincts of the flesh,  nor  made  the  sons  of  God  'by  the  will  of  man,'  who sometimes adopts the child of another as his own; but they are 'born of God' through the ordinances of his grace. 'Behold how great love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the  children  of  God!'  'The  world,  indeed,  does  not  know  us, because it did not know him. Beloved, now are we the children of God. It does not yet appear what we shall be.' 

'Because you are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.' And if sons, it follows you 'are heirs  of  God  through  Christ' — the  heir  of  all  things.  Is  this, fellow-citizens, a romantic vision, or sober and solemn truth, that you  are  children  of  God,  possessing  the  spirit  of  Christ,  and constituted heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ of the eternal inheritance! What manner of persons, then, ought you to be! How pure,  how  holy  and  heavenly  in  your  temper;  how  just  and righteous in all your ways; how humble and devoted to the Lord; how joyful and triumphant in your King! 

Permit me, then, to ask, Wherein do you excel? — nay, rather, you will propose this question to yourselves. You will say, How shall we still more successfully promote the interest, the honor, and the triumphs of the gospel of the kingdoms? Is there anything we can do by our behavior, our morality, our piety, by our influence, by all the  earthly  means  with  which  God  has  furnished  us?  Is  there anything we can do more to strengthen the army of the faith, to invigorate the champions of the kingdom, to make new conquests for  our  King?  Can  we  not  increase  the  joy  of  the  Lord  in converting souls — can we not furnish occasions of rejoicing to the angels of God — can we not gladden the hearts of thousands who have never tasted the joys of the children of God? 

In the present administration of the kingdom of God, during the absence of the King, he has said to the citizens, 'Put on the armor of  light' — 'Contend  earnestly  for  the  faith' — 'convert  the world' — 'occupy till I come' — 'let your light shine before men, that they,  seeing  your  good  works,  may  glorify  your  Father  in heaven' — 'that the Gentiles may, by your good works, which they shall behold,  glorify  God in  the day  of visitation.'  He has thus entrusted  to  the  citizens  the  great  work  for  which  he  died — the salvation of men. Let us, then, brethren, be found faithful to the Lord and to men, that he may address us at his coming with the most acceptable plaudit, 'Well done, good and faithful servants; enter into the joy of your Lord!' 

Great as the opposition is to truth and salvation, we have no reason to despond. Greater are our friends and allies, and infinitely more powerful than all our enemies. God is on our side — Jesus Christ is our  King — the  Holy  Spirit  is  at  his  disposal — angels  are  his ministering  servants — the  prayers  of  all  the  prophets,  apostles, saints, and martyrs are for our success — our brethren are numerous and strong — they have the Sword of the Spirit, the shield of faith, the  helmet  of  salvation,  the  breastplate  of  righteousness,  the artillery  of  truth,  the  arguments  of  God,  the  preparation  of  the gospel  of  peace — our  Commander  and  Captain  is  the  most successful General that ever entered the field of war — he never lost a battle — he is wonderful in counsel, excellent in working, valiant in  fight — the  Lord  of  *hosts*  is  his  name.  He  can  stultify  the machinations of our enemies, control all the powers of nature, and subdue all our foes, terrestrial and infernal. Under his conduct we are like Mount Zion, that can never be moved. Indeed, under him we are come to Mount Zion, the strong hold and fortress of the kingdom, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to myriads of angels, the general assembly and congregation of the first born, enrolled in heaven — to God the Judge of all — to the spirits of  just  men  made  perfect — to  Jesus  the  Mediator  of  the  New Constitution — and to the blood of sprinkling, which speaks such peace,  and  joy,  and  courage  to  the  heart.  Ought  we  not,  then, brethren, 'to be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might?' If in faith, and courage, and prayer, we put on the heavenly armor, and march under the King, sounding the gospel trumpet, the walls of Jericho will fall to the ground, and the banners of the Cross will wave  over  the  ruins  of  Paganism,  Atheism,  Scepticism,  and sectarianism — *Nil desperandum, te duce, Christe.* If a Roman could say, 'Nothing is to be feared under the auspices of Cesar,' may not the Christian say, There is no despair under the guardianship of Messiah the King? 

But,  fellow-citizens,  though  clothed  with  the  whole  panoply  of heaven, and headed by the Captain of Salvation, there is no success in this war to be expected, without constant and incessant prayer. When  the  Apostles  began  to  build  up  this  kingdom, notwithstanding all the gifts they enjoyed, they found it necessary to devote themselves to prayer as well as to the ministry of the word. And when Paul describes all the armor of God, piece by piece, in putting it on he says, 'Take the Sword of the Spirit — with all supplication and deprecation, pray at all seasons in spirit, watch with all perseverance and supplication for all the saints.' 

This  was  most  impressively  and  beautifully  pictured  out  in  the wars of ancient Israel against their enemies. While Moses lifted up his holy hands to heaven, Israel prevailed; and when he did not, Amalek prevailed. So is it now. When the disciples of Christ, the heaven born citizens of the kingdom, continue instant in prayer and watchfulness, the truth triumphs in their hearts and in the world. When  they  do  not,  they  become  cold,  timid,  and  impotent  as Sampson shorn, and the enemy gains strength over them. Then the good cause of the Lord languishes. 

It is not necessary that we should understand how prayer increases our zeal, our wisdom, our strength, our joy, or how it gives success to the cause, any more than that we should understand how our food  is  converted  into  flesh,  and  blood,  and  bones.  It  is  only necessary that we eat; and it is only necessary that we should pray as  we  are  taught  and  commanded.  Experience  proves  that  the outward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day  by  our  daily  bread,  and experience  proves  that  the  inward  man  is  renewed  day  by  day prayer and thanksgiving. The Lord has promised his Holy Spirit to them that ask him in truth; and is it not necessary to our success? If it be not necessary to give new revelations, it is necessary to keep in  mind  those  already  given,  and  to  bring  the  word  written seasonably to our remembrance. Besides, if the Spirit of the Lord was necessary to the success of Gideon and Barak, and Sampson and David, and all the great warriors of Israel according to the flesh, who fought the battles of the Lord with the sword, the sling, and the bow; who can say that it is not necessary to those who draw the Sword of the Spirit and fight the good fight of faith? In my judgment it is as necessary now as then — necessary, I mean, to equal success — necessary to the success of those who labor in the word  and  teaching,  and  necessary  to  those  who  would  acquit themselves like men, in every department in the ranks of the great army of the Lord of hosts. 

Though the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, they are mighty (only, however, *through God,* to the overturning of strong holds,) to the overturning of all reasonings against the truth, and every high thing raised up against the knowledge of God, and in leading captive every thought to the obedience of Christ. Let us then,  fellow-citizens,  whether  as  leaders  or  as  private  soldiers, abound  in  prayer  and  supplications  to  God  night  and  day.  If sincere, and ardent, and incessant prayers to God for every thing that he has promised; for all things for which the Apostles prayed were offered us by all the congregations, and by every disciple in his family and in his closet, for the triumphs of the truth, then would  we  see  the  army  of  the  Lord  successful  in  fight  against atheism, infidelity, and sectarianism — then would we see disciples growing in knowledge and in favor with God and man. And is not the conversion of the world and our own eternal salvation infinitely worthy of all the effort and enterprise in man, seeing God himself has done so much in the gift of his Son and Holy Spirit, and left for us so little to do — nothing, indeed, but what is in the compass of our power? And shall we withhold that little, especially as he has given us so many and so exceedingly great and precious promises to  stimulate us to  exertion? Has  not Jesus  said, 'The conqueror shall inherit all things' — that he 'will not blot out his name out of the book of life' — that he will confess it before his Father and his holy angels — that he will place him 'upon his throne, and give him the crown of life that shall never fade away'? 

Rise up, then, in the strength of Judah's Lion! Be valiant for the truth! Adorn yourselves with all the graces of the Spirit of God! Put  on  the  armor  of  light:  and,  with  all  the  gentleness,  and meekness, and mildness there is in Christ — with all the courage, and patience, and zeal, and effort, worthy of a cause so salutary, so pure, so holy, and so divine, determine never to faint nor to falter till you enter the pearly gates — never to lay down your arms, till, with  the  triumphant  millions,  you  stand  before  the  throne,  and exultingly sing, "Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and might, and honor, and glory, and blessing!" — "To him who sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb be  blessing,  and  honor,  and  glory  and  strength  forever  and forever!" Amen. 

***A WORD TO FRIENDLY ALIENS.*** 

Whether to regard you in the light of *Proselytes of the Gate,* who refused circumcision, but wished to live in the land of Israel, to be in  the suburbs of the cities  of Judah, and to  keep some of the institutions  of  the  ancient  kingdom  of  God,  without  becoming fellow-citizens of that kingdom; or whether to regard you as the Samaritans of old, who built for themselves a temple of God upon Mount Gerizim, held fast a part of the ancient revelation of God, and  rejected  only  such  parts  of  it  as  did  not  suit  their prejudices — worshipped the God of Israel in common with the idols of the nations, from which they sprang — I say, whether to regard you in the light of the one or the other of those ancient professors of  religion,  might  require  more  skill  in  casuistry  than  we possess — more leisure than we have at our disposal — and more labor than either of us have patience to endure. One thing, however, is obvious, that if, under the Reign of Heaven it behooved so good a man as Cornelius ('a man of piety, and one that feared God with all his house, giving also much alms to the people, and praying to God continually,') to '*hear words by which he might be saved,*' and to put on Christ by immersion into his death, that he might enter the kingdom of heaven, and enjoy the remission of sins, and the hope of  an  inheritance  among  all  the  sanctified — certainly  it  is  both expedient and necessary that you also go and do likewise. 

Every sectarian in the land, how honest and pious soever, ought to bury  his  sectarianism,  and  all  his  other  sins  of  omission  and commission, in 'the bath of regeneration.' It is a high crime and misdemeanor in any man, professing to have received the Messiah in his proper person, character, and office, to refuse allegiance to him in anything; and to substitute human inventions and traditions in lieu of the ordinances and statutes of Prince Immanuel. Indeed, the keeping up of any dogma, practice, or custom, which directly or indirectly supplants  the constitution, laws, and usages of the kingdom  over  which  Jesus  presides,  is  directly  opposed  to  his government; and would ultimate in dethroning him in favor of a rival, and in placing upon his throne the author of that dogma, practice, or usage which supplants the institution of the Savior of the world. 

It is to you, then, who, in the name of the King, are changing his ordinances, and substituting your own expedients for the wisdom and authority of the Judge of all, we now propose the following considerations: —  

Every kingdom has one uniform law or institution for naturalizing aliens; and that institution, of whatever sort it be, is obligatory, by the  authority  of  the  government,  upon  every  one  who  would become a citizen. We say it is obligatory upon him who desires to be a citizen to submit to that institution. But does not your practice and your dogma positively say that it is not the duty of an alien to be born again, but that it is the duty of his father or guardian to have him naturalized? Now, although manythings are in common the duty of brother, father, and child, yet those duties which belong specifically to a father cannot belong to his child, either in religion, morality, or society. If it be the father's duty to 'offer his child to the Lord,' to speak in your own style, it is not the duty of the child to  offer himself.  It was not  Isaac's  duty to be  circumcised, but Abraham's duty to circumcise him. If, then, it was your father's duty to have made you citizens of the kingdom of heaven, it is not your duty to become citizens, unless you can produce a law saying that in *all cases* where the father fails to do his duty, then it shall be the duty of the child to do that which his father neglected. 

Again — if all fathers, like yours, had, upon their own responsibility, without any command from the Lord, baptized their children, there would not be one in a nation to whom it could be said, 'Repent and be  baptized;'  much  less  could  it  be  said  to  every  penitent,  'Be baptized, every one of you, by the authority of the Lord, for the remission of sins.' These remarks are only intended to show that your  institutions  do,  in  truth,  go  to  the  subversion  of  the government of Christ, and to the entire abolition of the institutions of his kingdom. On this account alone, if for no other reason, you ought  to  be  constitutionally  naturalized,  and  be  legally  and honorably inducted into the kingdom of heaven. It is a solemn duty you  owe  the  King  and  his  government;  and  if  you  have  a conscience  formed  by  the  oracles  of  God,  you  can  have  no confidence in God, nor real peace of mind, so long as you give your support, your countenance, example, and entire influence to break down the institutions of Jesus Christ, to open his kingdom to all that is born of the flesh, and to prevent, as far as you can, every man  from  the  pleasure  of  choosing  whom  he  shall  obey — of confessing him before men — of taking his  yoke — of dying, being buried, and raised with Christ in his gracious institution. If Jesus himself, for the sake of fulfilling all righteousness, or of honoring every divine institution, though he needed not the reformation for remission  of  sins  which  John  preached,  was  immersed  by John — what have you to say for yourselves — you who would claim the honors and privileges of the kingdom of heaven, refusing to follow  the  example  of  Jesus,  and  who  virtually  subvert  his authority by supporting a system which would, if carried out, not allow a voluntary agent in the race of Adam, to do that which all the first converts of Christ did, by authority of the commission which Jesus gave to his Apostles? 

Again — whatever confidence you may now possess, that you are good citizens of the kingdom of Messiah, that confidence is not founded  upon  a  "**thus  saith  the  lord**,"  but  upon  your  own reasonings, which all men must acknowledge may be in this, as in many other things, fallacious. Jesus has said, 'He that believes and is immersed shall be saved;' and Peter commanded every penitent to be immersed for the remission of his sins. Now he who hears the word, believes it, and is on his own confession immersed, has an assurance, a confidence, which is impossible for you to have. 

Let me add only another consideration, for we are not now arguing the merits of your theory, or that of any party: it is your duty, as you  desire  the  union  of  (what  you  call)  the  church,  and  the conversion of the world, forthwith to be immersed and to be born constitutionally into the kingdom; because all Protestants, of every name, if sincere believers in Jesus *as the Christ,* irrespective of every  opinion  found  in  any  human  creed,  could  if  they  would, honor and obey his institutions, come into one fold, and sit down together under the reign of the Messiah. If all would follow your example, this would necessarily follow; if they do not, you have done your duty. In being thus immersed, all the world, Catholic and Protestant, admit that you are truly and scripturally baptized; for all admit that an *immersed* penitent is constitutionally baptized into Christ; but only a part of the professing world can admit that rite  of  infant  affusion  on  which  you  rely  as  introducing  you, without previous knowledge, faith, or repentance, into the family of  God.  Acquit,  then,  your  conscience;  follow  the  example  of Jesus;  honor  and  support  his  authority;  promote  the  union  and peace of the family of God; do what in you lies for the conversion of the world; enter into the full enjoyment of the blessings of the kingdom of heaven by confessing the ancient faith, and by being immersed in the name of Jesus into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, for the remission of sins. Then you may  say  as  Jesus  said  to  the  Samaritan  woman,  Although  the Samaritans have a temple on Mount Gerizim, a priesthood, and the five books of Moses, 'Salvation is of the Jews.' Although the sects have the Oracles of God, human creeds, many altars, priests, and religious usages, *the enjoyment of salvation* is among them who simply believe what the Apostles wrote concerning Jesus, and who from  the heart obey that  mould of doctrine which the Apostles delivered to us. 

In so doing  you will, moreover, most wisely  consult  your own safety and security from the signal calamities that are every day accumulating, and soon to fall with overwhelming violence on a distracted, divided, alienated, and adulterous generation. If you are '*the people of God,*' as you profess, and as we would fain imagine, then you are commanded by a voice from heaven, 'Come out of her, *my people,* that you partake not of the sins of mystic Babylon, and that you receive not a portion of her plagues.'1 If affliction, and 

shame, and poverty, and reproach, were to be the inalienable lot of the most approved servants of God, it is better, infinitely better for you  to  suffer  with  them,  than  to  enjoy  for  a  season  all  that  a corrupted and apostate society can bestow upon you. Remember who  it  is  that  has  said,  'Happy  are  they  who  keep  his commandments, for they shall have a right to the tree of life, and they shall enter in through the gates into the city!' 

***ADDRESS TO BELLIGERENT ALIENS.*** 

To him who, through the telescope of faith, surveys your camp, there  appears  not  on  the  whole  map  of  creation  such  a  motley group,  such  a  heterogeneous  and  wretched  amalgamation  of distracted spirits, as are found in actual insurrection and rebellion, in a mad and accursed alliance against the reigning Monarch of creation. In your lines are found every unclean and hateful spirit on this side the fathomless gulf, the dark and rayless receptacle of fallen  and  ruined  intelligences,  who,  in  endless  and  fruitless wailings, lament their own follies, and through an incessant night of  despair  anathematize  themselves,  and  their  coadjutors  in  the perpetuation of their eternal suicide. Yes, in your ranks are found all who wilfully reject the Son of God, and will not have him to reign over them; whether they are styled the decent moralist, the honest deist, sceptic, atheist, infidel, the speculating Sadducee, the boasting Pharisee, the supercilious Jew, the resentful Samaritan, or the idolatrous Gentile. All ranks and degrees of men in political society — the  king  and  the  beggar — the  sage  philosopher  and  the uneducated clown — the rich and the poor, who disdain the precepts of the Messiah, unite with you in this unholy alliance against the kingdom  of  heaven.  You  may  boast  of  many  a  decent fellow-soldier in the crusade against Immanuel; many who, when weighed in the balances of the political sanctuary, are not found wanting in all the decencies of this present life; but yet look at the innumerable  crowds  of  every  sort  of  wretches,  down  to  the filthiest,  vilest  matricide,  who  in  your  communion  are  fighting under  your  banners — stout-hearted  rebels! — leagued  with  you  in your attempts to dethrone the Lord's Anointed. If you boast of one Marcus Aurelius, you must fraternize with many a Nero, Domitian, Caligula, and Heliogabalus.  If  you rejoice in the virtues of one Seneca, you must own the vices of the ten thousand murderers, robbers,  adulterers,  drunkards,  profane  swearers,  and  lecherous debauchees, who have rejected the counsels of heaven, because the precepts of righteousness and life forbade their crimes. 

If, then, my friends, (for I now address the most honorable of your community,)  you  boast  that  you  belong  to  a  very  large  and respectable synagogue; remember, I pray  you, that to this same synagogue  in  which  you  have  your  brotherhood,  belongs  every thing mean, and vile, and wretched, in every land where the name of Jesus has been announced. *What a group!* Have you so much of the reflex light of the gospel falling upon your vision as to flush your cheek with the glow of shame when you look along the lines of  your alliance, and survey the horrible faces, the ragged, and tattered,  and  squalid,  and  filthy  wretches,  *your  companions  in arms — members  with  you  in  the  synagogue  of  Satan — and confederates against the Prince of Peace!* If you cannot blush at such a spectacle, you are not among them to whom I would tender the pearls of Jesus Christ. 

What do you then say? "I am ashamed of such an alliance — of such a  brotherhood;  and  therefore  I  have  joined  the  Temperance Society — I  belong  to  the  Literary  Club — and  I  carry  my  family regularly  to  church  every  Sunday."  And  do  you  think,  O simpleton!  that  these  human  inventions,  which  only  divide  the kingdom of Satan into castes, and form within it various private communications, honorable and dishonorable associations, learned and unlearned fraternities, moral and immoral conventicles, change the state of a single son of Adam as respects the Son of God!! Then may  Whig  and  Tory,  Masonic  and  Antimasonic  clubs  and conclaves — then may every political cabal, for the sake of elevating some demagogue, change the political relations in the state, and make an unmake American citizens according to fancy, in despite of constitution, law, and established precedents. No, sir;  should there be as many parties in the state, as there are days in a month, membership  in  any  one  of  these  affects  not,  in  the  least,  the standing of any man as a citizen in relation to the United States, or to any foreign power. And by parity of reason, as well as by all that is written in the New Testament, should you join all the benevolent societies on the checkered map of Christendom, and fraternize with every brotherhood born *after the will of man,* this would neither change nor destroy your citizenship in the kingdom of Satan — still you  would  be  an  alien  from  the  kingdom  of  the  Messiah — a foreigner  as  respects  all  its  covenanted  blessings — and,  in  the unbiassed  judgment  of  the  universe,  you  would  stand  enrolled amongst its enemies. 

In *character* there are many degrees, as respects any and every attribute which enters into its formation; but as respects *state,* there are no degrees. In the nature of things it is impossible. Every man is either married or single, a brother, a master, a citizen, or he is not. Every man is either Christ's or Belial's; there is no middle power,  and  therefore  no  neutral  state.  Hence  the  King  himself, when on the present theatre of war, told his companions to regard every man as his enemy who was not on his side. Amongst his professed friends, they who in works deny him, are even counted as enemies.  

What  a  hopeless  struggle  is  that  in  which  you  are  engaged! Discomfiture,  soon  or  late,  awaits  you.  Have  you  counsel  and strength to oppose the Sovereign of the Universe? Do you think you can frustrate the counsels of Infinite Wisdom and overcome Omnipotence? Your master is already a prisoner — your chief is in chains. The fire of eternal vengeance is already kindled for Satan and  all  his  subjects.  Mad  in  his  disappointed  ambition,  and implacable in his hatred of him against whom he rebelled, he only seeks  to  gratify  his  own  malice,  by  involving  with  himself  in irremediable ruin the unhappy victims of his seduction. He only seeks to desolate the dominions of God, and to ruin forever his fellow creatures. Will you, then, serve your worst enemy, and war against your best friend? 

But your rebellion can effect nothing against God. His arm is too strong for the whole creation. You cannot defeat his counsels nor stay his almighty hand. The earth on which you stand trembles at his rebuke; the foundations of the hills and mountains are moved and shaken at his presence. You fight against yourselves. God's detestation of your course arises not from any apprehension that you can  injure him;  but  because  you destroy  yourselves. Every triumph which your inordinate desires and passions gain over the remonstrances of reason and conscience only precipitates you into deeper and deeper misery, matures you for perdition, and makes it essential  to  the  good  order  and  happiness  of  the  universe,  you should suffer an 'everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power.' 

What, then, infatuates  you, that you should choose death rather than life, and prefer destruction to salvation? "I am not sure that the  gospel  is  true;  I  love  my  companions,  and  cannot  see  any criminality in  gratifying those passions and appetites which my creator has planted in my constitution." 

You admit there is a God, your Creator; but you doubt whether the gospel is true! What an abuse of reason and evidence! Can you infer from any premises in your possession, that **he**, whose creation man is, who has exhibited to the eye and ear of man so much wisdom,  power,  and  goodness,  in  all  his  grand  designs  already accomplished, and daily accomplishing, in the heavens and in the earth, teaching men to  sustain the present life, to anticipate the future, and to provide for it, has never intelligibly addressed him on a subject of incomparably more importance — his own ultimate destiny! That God should have been at so much pains to elevate man in nature — to furnish him with such an organization — to bestow on him reason and speech — admirably qualifying him to acquire and communicate instruction, on all things necessary to his present animal  enjoyments;  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  have  never communicated  to  him  anything  relative  to  his  intellectual nature — never to have addressed him on the themes, which, as a rational creature, he must necessarily most of all desire to know; to have  done  every  thing  for  his  body,  and  for  the  present — and nothing for his mind, nor for the future — is, to say the least of it, the most  improbable  conceit  that  the  most  romantic  fancy  can entertain. 

That the Creator *could not* enlighten him on these topics, is wholly inadmissible. That he could, and *would not,* is directly contrary to every analogy in creation — contradictory to every proof we have of his benevolence, an inexplicable exception to the whole order of his  government:  for  he  has  provided  objects  for  every sense — objects  for  every  intellectual  power — objects  for  every affection,  honorable  passion,  appetite  and  propensity,  in  our constitution; but, on your hypothesis, he has only failed in that which is infinitely more dear to us, more consonant to our whole rational nature, and most essential to our happiness!! It is most contrary to reason. 

But the folly of your scepticism is still more glaring when we open the book of the gospel of salvation. In the history of Jesus you have the fulfillment of a thousand predictions, expressed by numerous Prophets  for  1500  years  before  he  was  born.  These  recorded prophecies  were  in  the  possession  of  his  and  our  most  bitter enemies, when he appeared, and are still extant in their hands. How can you dispose of these? All antiquity confirms the existence of Jesus of Nazareth in the times of Augustus and Tiberius Cesar. No contemporary opponent denied his miracles: they explained them away, but questioned not the wonderful works which he wrought. His character was the only perfect and unexceptionable one the world ever saw, either in print, or in real life; and yet you imagine him to have been the greatest liar and most infamous imposter that ever lived. You must admit him to have been the teacher of every thing  moral,  and  pure  and  godlike — to  have  lived  the  most exemplary  life — to  have  employed  his  whole  life  in  doing good — while, to countenance  your scepticism, you must imagine him  to  have  been  the  greatest  deceiver  and  most  blasphemous pretender the world ever saw! Truly, you are fond of paradox! 

His Apostles, too, for the sake of being accounted the offscourings of the world, and the filth of all society — for the sake of poverty, contumely,  stripes,  imprisonment,  and  martyrdom,  you  imagine travelled  over  the  earth  teaching  virtue  and holiness — discountenancing every specifies of vice and immorality, while telling the most impudent lies, and that too about matters of palpable fact, about which no man having eyes and ears could be mistaken! How great your credulity! How weak your faith! 

And  to  consummate  the  whole,  you  admit  that  in  the  most enlightened  age,  and  amongst  the  most  disputatious  and discriminating population, both Jewish, Roman, and Grecian, in Jerusalem itself, the very theatre of the crucifixion of Christ, and in all Judea and Samaria, and in all the great towns and cities of the whole ancient Roman Empire, Eastern and Western, these rude and uncultivated Galileans did actually succeed in persuading hundred of thousands of persons, of all ranks, sexes, ages, and intellects, to renounce  their  former  opinions  and  practices — to  encounter proscription,  confiscation of goods,  banishment, and even death itself in numerous instances, through faith in their testimony, while every thing was fresh, and when the detection of any fiction or fraud was most easy! 

Now, if it were possible to place your folly in an attitude still more inexcusable, I would ask you to show what there is in the gospel, that  is  not  infinitely  worthy  of  God  to  bestow,  and  of  man  to receive? And where under the canopy of the skies, in any country, language,  or  age  of  time,  is  there  anything  that  confers  greater honor on man, or proposes to him anything more worthy of his acceptance, than the gospel? 

Can  there  have  been  a  more  acceptable  model  proposed,  after which  to  fashion  man,  than  that  after  which  he  was  originally created? When he was beguiled and apostatized from God, could there have been deputed a more honorable personage to effect his reconciliation  to  God,  than  his  only  begotten  and  well  beloved Son? And could there even be imagined a more delectable destiny allotted to man, than an immortality of bliss in the palace of this vast universe, in the presence of his Father and his God forever and forever?  Now,  with  all  these  premises,  will  you  object  to  this religion, that it requires a man to be pure and holy, in order to his enjoyment of this eternal salvation? Then lay your hand upon your face, and blush, and be ashamed forever! 

But you say you love you companions! And who are they? Your fellow-rebels, foolish and infatuated like yourselves. The drunkard, the thief, the murderer, love their companions, the partners of their crimes.  Conspirators  and  partizans  in  any  undertaking,  kindred spirits in guilty and daring enterprise, confirm each other in their evil machinations, and either from mutual interest, or from some hateful affinity in evil dispositions, coalesce and league together in bands  of  malicious  depredation.  A  Cataline,  a  Jugurtha,  a Robespierre, had their confederates. The rakes, the libertines, the freebooters of every color, form their own fraternities, and have a liking of some sort for their companions. And wherein does your attachment to your companions differ from theirs? A congeniality of disposition, a similarity of likings and dislikings, all springing from you love of the world, and your dislike of the authority of the Messiah.  And  will  not  a  change  of  circumstances  convert  your affections into hatred? Soon or late, if you do not repent and turn to God, you that are leagued in the friendships of the world, those friendships arising from the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, will not only become enemies, but mutual tormentors  of  one  another.  Your  warmest  friends  in  your opposition to the Son of God will become King's evidence against you, and exasperate the flame that will consume you forever and ever.  Break  off,  then,  every  friendship,  alliance,  and  covenant, which you have formed with them that disdain the grace of God, and  condemn  the  Savior  of  the  world,  and  form  an  everlasting covenant with the people of God, which shall never be forgotten. Then, indeed, you may love your companions with all the affection of  your  hearts,  and  indulge  to  the  utmost  every  sympathy  and social feeling of your nature. Then may you embrace, in all the ardor of fraternal love, those kindred spirits that with you have vowed eternal allegiance to the gracious and rightful Sovereign of all  the  nations  of  the  redeemed,  in  heaven  and  on  earth.  Such companions  are  worth  possessing,  and  their  friendship  worth cultivating and preserving through all the journey of life; for it will be renewed beyond the Jordan, and flourish with increasing delight through the endless ages of eternity. 

But  you have said that the gratification of all the impulses and propensities of your nature must be innocent, because they are the creation of God, and were sown in the embryo of your physical constitution. If under the control of that light and reason, under which  God  commanded  your  affections  and  appetites  to  move, your reasoning would be sound and safe; but if they have usurped a tyranny over your judgment, and captivated your reason, they are not  to  be  gratified.  They  are  like  successful  rebels  that  have dethroned their sovereign; and, because by violence and fraud in possession of the throne, they plead a divine right to wield the sceptre over their dethroned Prince. Such is the meaning of the plea which you urge in favor of your rebellious affections. When man rebelled against his Creator, the beasts of the field, till then under  his  dominion,  rebelled  against  him;  and  all  his  passions, affections, and propensities partook of the general disorder — of that wild  and  licentious  anarchy  which  ensued  upon  man's disobedience. And have you not in your daily observation — nay, have you not in your own experience, irrefragable evidence that the uncontrolled indulgence of even the instinctive appetites, as well  as  the  gratification  of  inordinate  passions  and  affections, necessarily issue in the destruction of the physical constitution of man? Is not the control of reason, is not the exercise of discretion in the licence of every animal indulgence, essential to the health and life of man? Then why crave an exemption from the universal law of human existence, in favor of that demoralizing course of indulgence, which you would fain call innocent in morals, though in physics evidently destructive to animal organization? 

When  reconciled  to  God  through  the  gospel,  the  peace  of  God which passes understanding reigning in the heart, all is order and harmony  within.  Then,  under  the  control  of  enlightened  and sanctified reason, all the passions, appetites, and instincts of our nature, like the planets  round the sun,  move in their respective orbits in the most perfect good order, preserving a perfect balance in all the principles and powers of human action. Pleasures without alloy  are  then  felt  and  enjoyed  from  a  thousand  sources,  from which, in the tumult and disorder of rebellion, every transgressor is debarred.  It  is  then  found,  that  there  is  not  a  supernumerary passion,  affection,  nor  appetite  in  man — not  one  that  adds  not something  to  his  enjoyment — not  one  that  may  not  be  made  an instrument of righteousness, a means of doing good to others, as well as of enjoying good ourselves. Why not, then, lay down the weapons of your rebellion, and be at peace with God, with your fellow-creatures, and with yourselves? 

"Admitting, then, that the gospel is true — that in my present state and standing I am an alien from the kingdom of heaven, and that I wished to become a citizen, where shall I find this kingdom of heaven, and how shall I be constituted a citizen thereof?" Well, indeed, may you admit the gospel to be true, both on account of what  it  is  in  itself,  and  the  evidence  which  sustains  it.  Only suppose it to be false — extinguish all the light which it sheds on the human  race — make  void  all  its  promises — annul  all  its hopes — eradicate from the human breast all the motives which it imparts — and what remains to explain the universe, to develop the moral character of God, to dissipate the gloom which envelopes the eternal night the destiny of man, to solace and cheer him during the incessant struggle of life, to soothe the bed of affliction and death, and to countervail the inward dread and horror of falling into nothing — of being forever lost in the promiscuous wreck of nature — of sinking down into the grave, the food of worms, the prey of an eternal death? 

It  is  like  annihilating  the  sun  in  the  heavens.  An  eternal  night ensures. There is no beauty, form, nor comeliness in creation. The universe is  in  ruins. The world  without the  Bible is  a universe without a sun. The Atheist is but an atom of matter in motion, belonging  to  no  system,  amenable  to  none,  without  a  destiny, without  an  object  to  live  or  to  die.  He  boasts  there  is  none  to punish him: but then there is none to help him — none to reward him. He has no Father, proprietor, or ruler — no filial affection, no sense of obligation, no gratitude, no comfort in reflection, no joy in anticipation. If he cannot be blamed, he cannot be praised — if he cannot be praised, he cannot be honored — and man without honor is more wretched than the beasts that perish. Unenviable mortal! 

What an abortion is the system of nature, if man lives not again! It is a creation for the sake of destruction. It is an infinite series of designs, ending in nothing. It is a universe of blanks, without a single  prize.  It  cannot  be.  The  Bible  is  necessary  to  the interpretation  of  nature.  It  is  the  only  comment  on  nature — on providence — on  man.  Man  without  it,  and  without  the  hope  of immortality, has nothing to rouse him into action. He is a savage, a Hottentot, a cannibal, a worm. You are compelled, then, to admit that the gospel is true, unless you put out the eye of reason, and refuse to hear the voice of Nature. 

But is it not a happy necessity which compels your belief in God, and in his Son the renovator of the Universe? It opens to you all the mysteries of creation, the arcana of the temple of nature, and inducts you to the fountain of being and of bliss. It inspires you with motives of high and lofty enterprise, stimulates you to manly action, and points out a prize worthy of the best efforts of body, soul, and spirit. Is it not, then, 'a credible saying, and worthy of universal acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even the chief?' 

But you ask, 'Where shall the kingdom of heaven be found, and how may  you be  constituted a  citizen of it?' The Prophets  and Apostles  must  be  your  guide  in  deciding  these  great  questions. Moses in the law, all the Prophets, and all the Apostles point you to  the  Lamb  of  God  that  takes  away  the  sin  of  the  world — the Apostle of the Father Almighty — the divinely constituted Chief of the  kingdom  of  heaven.  He  has  submitted  his  claims  to  your examination — he has invited you to test all his pretensions — and to the humble and docile he has tendered all necessary assistance, in deciding upon his person and mission. 

His character is so familiar, so condescending, so full of all grace and goodness, that all may approach him. The halt, the maimed, the deaf, the dumb, the blind, found in him a friend and physician indeed. None importune his aid in vain. His ears are always open to the tale of woe. His eyes streams with sympathy on every object of  distress.  He  invites  all  the  wretched  and  repulses  none  who implore relief. He chides only the proud, and kindly receives and blesses the humble. He invites and beseeches the weary, the heavy laden, the broken hearted, the oppressed, and all the sons of want and misfortune, to come to him, and tenders relief to all. 

In his official dignity he presides over the universe. He is the High Priest of God and the Prophet and Messenger of Peace. He has the key of David; he opens and shuts the Paradise of God. He is the only Potentate, and has the power of granting remission of all sins to all who obey him. 

To  receive  him  in  his  personal  glory  and  official  dignity  and supremacy,  as  the  Messiah  of  God,  the  only  begotten  of  the Father — to know him in his true and proper character, is the only prerequisite to the obedience of faith. He that thus accredits him is not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  To  assume  him  as  your Prophet, your High Priest, and your King; to submit to him in these relations, being immersed into his death, will translate you into the kingdom of heaven. Why not, then, gladly and immediately yield him the admiration of your understanding, and the homage of your heart? Why not now enter into the possession of all the riches, and fulness, and excellence of the kingdom? He commands *all* men to repent — he beseeches every sinner whom he addresses in his word, to receive pardon and eternal life as a gracious gift. 

Can you doubt his power to save, to instruct, and to sanctify you for  heaven?  Can  you  doubt  his  condescending  mercy  and compassion?  Will  not  he  that  pitied  the  blind  Bartimeus,  that condoled with the widow of Nain, that wept with Mary and Martha at the grave of Lazarus, that heard the plea of the Syrophenician woman, that cleansed the supplicating leper, that compassionated the  famishing  multitudes,  that  looked  with  pity  (even  in  the agonies of the cross) upon an importuning thief, have pity upon you, and every returning prodigal, who sues for mercy at the gate of his kingdom? 

Is there in  the universe, one whom  you can believe with  more assurance,  than  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness,  who,  in  the presence  of  Pontius  Pilate,  witnessed  a  good  confession  at  the hazard of his life? Is there any person in heaven, on earth, or under the  earth,  more  worthy  of  your  confidence,  than  the  sinner's friend — than  he  who,  always,  and  in  all  circumstances,  bore testimony to the truth? When did he ever violate his word, or suffer his promise to fail? Who ever repented of his confidence in Jesus, or of relying implicitly upon his word? Who ever was put to shame because of confidence in him? 

Who can offer such inducements to obedience by his authority as the Savior of the world? Who has such power to bless? He has all authority in heaven and on earth. He has power to forgive sins, to raise the dead, to bestow immortality and eternal life, and to judge the living and the dead. And has he not tendered a participation of his official authority to every one who submits to his government, and who, by him, is reconciled to God? If he have wisdom and power divine, has he not pledged these to the relief, guidance, and benefit  of  his  people?  Who  can  injure  them  under  his protection — condemn  whom  he  justifies — criminate  whom  he pardons — or snatch out of his hands, those who betake themselves to his mercy? 

Was  there  ever  love  like  his  love — compassion  like  his compassion — or condescension like his condescension! Who ever could — who  ever  did  humble  himself  like  the  Son  of  God?  On whose cheek ever flowed tears of purer sympathy for human woe, than  those  he  shed?  Whose  bowels  ever  moved  with  such compassion, as that which dissolved his heart in tender mercies for the afflicted sons and daughters of men? Who ever for his friends, endured such contradiction of sinners against himself; submitted to such indignities; sustained such accumulated sorrows and griefs; suffered  such  agonies  of  mind  and  body;  as  those  which  he endured in giving his life an offering for his enemies? Forsaken by his  God,  abandoned  by  his  friends,  deserted  of  every  stay, surrounded  by  the  fiercest  enemies,  the  most  implacable  foes, whose hearts were harder than adamant, insulting the very pangs which they inflicted, he expired on the accursed tree! The heavens blushed  at  the  sight — the  sun  covered  his  face — the  earth trembled — the rocks split — the veil of the temple was rent from top to  bottom — and  graves  opened.  All  nature  stood  horror-stricken, when Roman soldiers, urged by blood-thirsty priests, nailed him to the cross — when the chief priests, scribes, and elders in derision said, 'He saved others: cannot he save himself?' The person who perceives  not,  who  feels  not  the  eloquence  of  his  love consummated  in  his  death — the  tenderness  of  his  entreaties  and expostulations, is not to be reasoned with — is not to be moved by human power. Will you not, then, honor your reason by honoring the Son of God — by giving up your understanding, your wills, your affections, to the teachings of the Good Spirit — to the guidance of his love? Then, and only then, can you feel yourselves safe, secure, and happy. 

Need you to be reminded how much you are indebted to his long suffering patience already — to his benevolence in all the gifts and bounties of his providence vouchsafed to you? How many days and nights has he guarded, sustained, and succoured you? Has he not saved you from ten thousand dangers — from the pestilence that walks  in  darkness  secretly,  and  from  destruction  that  wastes  at noon  day?  Who  can  tell  but  he  has  lengthened  out  your unprofitable existence to this very hour, that you might now repent of all your sins, turn to God with your whole heart, be baptized for the  remission  of  your  past  transgressions,  be  adopted  into  the family of God, and yet receive an inheritance among the sanctified. Arise, then, in the strength of Israel's God — accept salvation at his hands — enter into his kingdom, and be forever blessed. You will not, you cannot repent of such a step, of such a noble surrender of yourself while life endures; in the hour of death, in the day of judgment, nor during the endless succession of ages in eternity. *To-day,* then, hear his voice: to-morrow may be for ever too late! All  things  are  ready —  — Come. —  — Saints  on  earth,  and  angels  in heaven — apostles, prophets, and martyrs will rejoice over you — and you will rejoice with them for ever and for ever. Amen! 

