Part VI:  Breaking the Loaf 

Man was not made for the Christian institution; but the Christian Institution  for  man.  None  but  a  master  of  the  human constitution — none  but  one  perfectly  skilled  in  all  the  animal, intellectual, and moral endowments of man, could perfectly adapt an institution to man in reference to all that he is, and to all that he is  destined  to  become.  Such  is  the  Christian  Institution.  Its evidences of a divine origin increase and brighten in the ratio of our progress in the science of man. He who most attentively and profoundly reads himself, and contemplates the picture which the Lord of this Institution has drawn of him, will be most willing to confess,  that  man  is  wholly  incapable  of  originating  it.  He  is ignorant of himself, and of the race from which he sprang, who can persuade himself that man, in any age, or in any country, was so far superior to himself as to have invented such an Institution as the Christian. That development of man, in all his natural, moral, and religious relations, which the Great Teacher has given, is not farther beyond the intellectual powers of man, than is the creation of the Sun, Moon, and Stars beyond his physical strength. 

The eye of man cannot see itself; the ear of man cannot hear itself; nor the understanding of man discern itself: but there is one who sees the human eye, who hears the human ear, and who discerns the human understanding. He it is, who alone is skilled in revealing man to himself, and himself to man. He who made the eye of man, can he not see? He who made the ear of man, can he not hear? He who made the heart of man, can he not know? 

It is as supernatural to adapt a system to man, as it is to create him. He has never thought much upon his own powers, who has not seen as much wisdom on the outside, as in the inside of the human head. To suit the outside to the inside, required as much wisdom as to suit the inside to the outside, and yet the exterior arrangement exists for the interior. To fashion a casement for the human soul exhibits as many attributes of  a creator, as to  fashion a human spirit  for  its  habitation.  Man,  therefore,  could  as  easily  make himself, as a system of religion to suit himself. It will be admitted, that it calls for as much skill to adapt the appendages to the human eye, as the human eye to its appendages. To us it is equally plain, that  it  requires  as  much  wisdom  to  adapt  a  religion  to  man, circumstanced as he is, as to create him an intellectual and moral being. 

But to understand the Christian Religion, we must study it; and to enjoy it, we must practice it. To come into the kingdom of Jesus Christ is one thing, and to live as a wise, a good, and a happy citizen is another. As every human kingdom has its constitution, laws, ordinances, manners, and customs; so has the kingdom of the Great King. He, then, who would be a good and happy citizen of it, must understand and submit to its constitution, laws, ordinances, manners, and customs. 

The object of the present essay is to develop one of the institutions or ordinances of this kingdom; and this we shall attempt by stating, illustrating, and sustaining the following propositions: —  

***Proposition 1 – There is a house on earth, called the house of God.*** 

The most high God dwells not in temples made with human hands; yet he condescended in the age of types to have a temple erected for himself, which he called his house, and glorified it with the symbols  of  his  presence.  In  allusion  to  this,  the  Christian community, organized under the government of his Son, is called his  house  and  temple.  'You  are  God's  building,'  says  Paul  to  a Christian community. This building is said to be 'built upon the Apostles and Prophets — Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone.' 'Know you not that you are the temple of God? The temple of God is holy, which temple you are.'1 

But in allusion to the Jewish temple, the Christian church occupies the middle space between the outer court and the holiest of all. 'The holy places made with hands were figures of the true.' The common priests went *always* into the first tabernacle or holy place, and the high priest *once a year* into the *holiest of all.* Thus, our Great High Priest went *once for all* into the true 'holiest of all,' into the real presence of God, and has permitted us Christians as a royal priesthood, as a chosen race, to enter always into the only holy place now on earth — the Christian church. 'As living stones we are built  up  into  a  *spiritual  house,*  a  holy  priesthood,  to  offer  up spiritual sacrifices most acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.'2 

But all we aim at is to show that the community under Christ is called '*the house of God.*' Paul once calls it *a* house of God, and once *the* house of God. An individual or single congregation, he calls '*a house of God.*'3 I have written to you, 'that you may know 

how  to  behave  yourself  in  a  house  of  God,  which  is  the congregation  of  God.'4  And  in  his  letter  to  the  Heb.  5:1-14 

speaking of the whole Christian community, he calls it the house of God.6 'Having a Great High Priest over the house of God, let us 

draw near," etc. It is, then, apparent, that there is under the Lord Messiah, now on earth, an institution called *the house of God;* and this  resembles  the  *holy  place*  between  the  outer  court  and  the holiest of all, which is the position to be proved. 

***Proposition 2 – In the house of God there is always the table of the Lord.*** 

As there is  an analogy  between the Jewish holy  place, and the Christian  house  of  God;  so  there  is  an  analogy  between  the furniture  of  the  first  tabernacle  or  holy  place,  and  those  who officiated in it; and the furniture of the Christian house of God, and those who officiate in it. 'In the first tabernacle, said Paul, which is called  *holy,*  there  were  the  candlestick,  and  the  table,  and  the showbread,'  or  the  loaves  of  the  presence.  On  the  golden  table every  Sabbath  day  were  placed  *twelve*  loaves,  which  were exhibited there for one week, and on the next Sabbath they were substituted  by  twelve  fresh  loaves  sprinkled  over  with frankincense. The loaves which were removed from the table, were eaten by the priests. These were called in the Hebrew, 'the loaves of the faces,' or the loaves of the presence. This emblem of the abundance of spiritual food in the presence of God for all who dwell  in  the  holy  place,  stood  always  upon  the  golden  table furnished by the twelve tribes, even in the wilderness. The light in the first tabernacle was not from *without,* but from the seven lamps placed on the golden candlestick; emblematic of the perfect light not derived from this world, which is enjoyed in the house of God. 

If, then, in the emblematic house of God, to which corresponds the Christian house of God, there was not only a table overlaid with gold, always spread, and on it displayed *twelve large loaves,* or cakes, sacred memorials and emblems of God's bounty and grace; shall we say that in that house, over which Jesus is a Son, there is not to stand always a table more precious than gold, covered with a richer repast for the holy and royal priesthood which the Lord has instituted, who may always enter into the holy place consecrated by himself. 

But we are not dependent on analogies, nor far fetched inferences, for the proof of this position. Paul, who perfectly understood both the Jewish and Christian Institutions, tells us, that there is in the Christian temple a table, appropriately called the Lord's Table, as a part of its furniture. He informs those who were in danger of being polluted by idolatry, 'that they could not be partakers of the Lord's table, and of the table of demons.'7 In all his allusions to this table in this connection, he represents it as continually approached by those in the Lord's house. 'The cup of the Lord' and 'the loaf,' for which thanks were continually offered, are the  furniture of this table, to which the Christian brotherhood have free access. 

The Apostle Paul reminds the saints in Corinth of their familiarity with the Lord's table, in speaking of it as being common as the meetings of the brotherhood. 'The cup of blessing for which we bless God, is it not the joint participation of the blood of Christ? The loaf which we break, is it not the joint participation of the body  of  Christ?'  In  this  style  we  speak  of  things  common  and usual, never thus of things uncommon or unusual. It is not the cup which we *have* received with thanks; nor is it the loaf which we *have* broken; but which we *do* break. But all that we aim at here is now accomplished; for it has been shown that, *in the Lord's house there is always the table of the Lord.* It is scarcely necessary to add, that if it be shown, that in the Lord's house there is the Lord's table, as a part of the furniture, it must always be there, unless, it can be shown that only some occasions require its presence, and others its absence; or that the Lord is poorer or more churlish at one time than at another; that he is not always able to keep a table, or  too  parsimonious  to  furnish  it  for  his  friends.  But  this  is  in anticipation of our subject, and we proceed to the third proposition. 

***Proposition 3 – On the Lord's table there is of necessity***  

***but one loaf.*** 

The necessity is not that of a positive law enjoining one loaf and only one, as the ritual of Moses enjoined twelve loaves. But it is a necessity arising from the meaning of the Institution as explained by  the  Apostles.  As  there  is  but  one  literal  body,  and  but  one mystical or figurative body having many members; so there must be but one loaf. The Apostle insists upon this, 'Because there is one loaf, we, the many, are one body; for we are all partakers of that one  loaf.'8  The  Greek  word  *artos,*  especially  when  joined  with words of number, says Dr. Macknight, always signifies *a loaf,* and is  so  translated  in  our  Bibles,  'Do  you  not  remember  the  *five loaves?*'9 There are many instances of the same sort. Dr. Campbell says, "that in the plural number it ought always to be rendered loaves;" but when there is a numeral before it, it indispensably must be rendered a loaf or loaves. Thus we say one loaf, seven loaves; not one bread, seven breads. 'Because there is one loaf,' says Paul, we must consider the whole congregation as one body. Here the Apostle reasons from what is more plain, to what is less plain;  from  what  was  established,  to  what  was  not  so  fully established in the minds of the Corinthians. There was no dispute about the one loaf; therefore, there ought to be none about the one body. This mode of reasoning makes it as certain as a positive law: because that which an Apostle reasons from must be an established fact,  or  an  established  principle.  To  have  argued  from  an assumption or a contingency to establish the unity of the body of Christ,  would  have  been  ridiculous  in  a  logician,  and  how unworthy of an Apostle! It was, then, an established institution, that there is but one loaf, inasmuch as the Apostle establishes his argument  by  a  reference  to  an  established  fact.  Our  third proposition is, then, sustained that *on the Lord's table there is of necessity but one loaf.* 

***Proposition 4 – All Christians are members of the house or family of God, are called and constituted a holy and a royal priesthood, and may, therefore bless God for the Lord's table, its loaf, and cup — approach it without fear and partake of it with joy as often as they please, in remembrance of the death of their Lord and Savior.*** 

The  different  clauses  of  this  proposition,  we  shall  sustain  in order — '*all Christian are members of the family or house of God:*'10

'But Christ is trusted as a Son over *his own family;* whose family we  are,  provided  we  maintain  our  profession  and  boasted  hope unshaken to  the end;' — '*are called and constituted a holy and a royal  priesthood.*'11  You,  also,  as  living  stones  are  built  up  a spiritual temple, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices most acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.' In the 9th verse of the same  chapter  he  says,  'But  you  are  an  elect  race,  a  chosen generation,  a  royal  priesthood;'  and  this  is  addressed  to  all  the brethren  dispersed  in  Pontus,  Galatia,  Cappadocia,  Asia,  and Bithynia. 

May not, then, *holy* and *royal* priests thank God for the Lord's table, its loaf, and cup of wine? May they not, without a *human* priest to consecrate the way for them, approach the Lord's table and handle the loaf and cup? If the common priests did not fear to approach a golden table, and to place upon it the loaves of the presence; if they feared not to take and eat the consecrated bread, because  priests  according  to  the  flesh — shall  royal  priests  fear, without the intervention of human hands, to approach the Lord's table and to partake of one loaf? If they should, they know not how to appreciate the consecration of Jesus, nor how to value their high calling and exalted designation as kings and priests to God. And may  we  not  say,  that  he  who  invested  with  a  little  clerical authority, derived only from 'the Man of Sin and Son of Perdition,' if borrowed from  the Romanists,  says  to  them, 'stand by,  I am holier than thou' — may we not say that such a one is worse than Diotrephes, who affected a pre-eminence, because he desecrates the royal priesthood of Jesus Christ, and calls him common and unclean, who has  been consecrated by the blood  of the Son of God? Such impiety can only be found amongst them who worship the beast, and who have covenanted and agreed that none shall buy or  sell,  save  those  who  receive  a  mark  on  their  foreheads,  and letters patent in their hands. But allow common sense to whisper a word into the ears of priests' "laymen," but Christ's '*royal priests.*' Do you not thank God for the cup while the priest stands by the table; and do you not handle the loaf and cup when they come to you? And would not your thanksgiving have been as acceptable, if the human mediator had not been there, and your participating as well pleasing to God, and as consolatory to yourself, if you had been the first that had handled the loaf or the cup, as when you are the second, or the fifty-second, in order of location? Let reason answer these two questions, and see what comes of the haughty assumptions of your Protestant clergy!! But this only by the way. 

I trust it is apparent that the royal priesthood may approach the Lord's  table  *without  fear,*  inasmuch  as  they  are  consecrated  to officiate by a blood, as far superior to that which consecrated the fleshly  priesthood,  as  the  Lord's  table,  covered  with  the  sacred emblems of the sacrifice of the Lord himself, is superior to the table which held only the twelve loaves of the presence; and as they are, to say the least, called by as holy and divine an election, and are as *chosen a race* of priests, as were those sprung from the loins of Levi. 

***Proposition 5 – The one loaf must be broken before the saints feast upon it, which has obtained for this        institution the name of "breaking the loaf."*** 

But some, doubtless, will ask, 'Is it not called *the Lord's Supper?*' Some have thought, amongst whom is Dr. Bell, that 1 Cor. 11:20. applies to the feasts of love or charity, rather than the showing forth the Lord's death. These may read the passage thus: — 'But your coming together into one place is not to eat a Lord's supper; for in eating it every one takes first his own supper; alluding, as they suppose, to a love feast eaten before *the breaking the loaf.*' But this Lord's supper is contradistinguished from their *own* supper. And might it not as reasonably be said, you cannot call *your* showing forth the Lord's death a Lord's supper; for before eating it you have eaten a supper of your own, which prevents you from making a *supper* of it? You do not make it a Lord's supper, if you first eat your supper. Nor, indeed, could the Corinthians call any eating a "Lord's supper," conducted as was the eating of their own suppers; for one ate and drank to excess, while another who was poor, or had no supper to bring, was hungry and put to shame. Could this be called a supper in honor of the Lord! 

But as the Lord had eaten a religious supper, had partaken of the paschal lamb with his disciples, before he instituted the breaking of the loaf, and drinking of the cup, as commemorative of his death, it seems improper to call it a supper; for it was instituted and eaten *after a supper.* Not in the sense of one of the meals of the day, can it be called either dinner or supper; for it supplies the place of no meal.  *Deipnos,*  here  rendered  *supper,*  in  the  days  of  Homer, represented breakfast.12 It also signified food in general or a feast. 

In the times of Demosthenes, it signified a feast or an evening meal. But it is of more importance to observe, that it is in the New Testament used figuratively as well as literally. Hence, we have the gospel blessings compared to a supper. We read of the 'marriage supper of the Lamb,' and 'the supper of the Great God.' Jesus says, 'If any man open to me, I will (*deipneso*) take supper with him and he with me.' When thus used it neither regards the time of day, nor the  quantity  eaten.  If  applied,  then,  to  this  institution  it  is figuratively, as it is elsewhere called "*the feast.*" For not only did the Lord appoint it, but in eating it we have communion with the Lord. The same idiom with the addition of the article occurs in Rev. 1:10. '*he kuriake hemera,*' the Lord's day. Upon the whole it appears more probable that the Apostle uses the words *kuriakos deipnos,* or Lord's supper, as applicable to the breaking of the loaf for which they gave thanks in honor of the Lord, than to their own supper or the feasts of love, usual among the brethren. If we say in accordance  with  the  Apostle's  style,  the  Lord's  day,  the  Lord's table, the Lord's cup, we may also say the Lord's supper. For in the Lord's house these are all sacred to him. 

As the calling of Bible things by Bible names is an important item in  the  present  reformation,  we  may  here  take  the  occasion  to remark,  that  both  "the  Sacrament"  and  "the  Eucharist"  are  of human  origin.  The  former  was  a  name  adopted  by  the  Latin church; because the observance was supposed to be an oath or vow to the Lord; and, as the term *sacramentum* signified an oath taken by a Roman soldier, to be true to his general and his country, the presumed to call this institution a sacrament or oath to the Lord. By the Greek church it is called *the Eucharist,* which word imports *the  giving  of  thanks,*  because  before  participating,  thanks  were presented for the loaf and the cup. It is also called the communion, or "*the communion of the saints;*" but this might indicate that it is exclusively  *the*  communion  of  saints;  and,  therefore,  it  is  more consistent to denominate it literally 'the breaking of the loaf.' But this is the only preliminary to the illustration and proof of our fifth proposition. 

We have said that the loaf must be broken before the saints partake of it. Jesus took a loaf from the paschal table and broke it before he gave it to his disciples. They received a broken loaf, emblematic of his  body  once  whole,  but  by  his  own  consent  broken  for  his disciples. In eating it we then remember that the Lord's body was by his own consent broken or wounded for us. Therefore, he that gives thanks for the loaf should break it, not as the representative of the Lord, but after his example; and after the disciples have partaken of this loaf, handing it to one another, or while they are partaking of it, the disciple who brake it partakes with them of the broken loaf — thus they all have communion with the Lord and with one another in eating the broken loaf. And thus they as priests feast upon his sacrifice. For the priests ate of the sacrifices and were thus partakers of the altar. The proof of all that is found in the institution given in Matt. 26:1-75 : Mark 14:1-72 : Luke 22:1-71 : and 1 Cor. 11:1-34 : In each of which his breaking of the loaf, *after* giving thanks, and *before* his disciples partook of it, is distinctly stated. 

It  is  not,  therefore,  strange,  that  the  literal  designation  of  this institution  should  be,  what  Luke  has  given  it  in  his  Acts  of Apostles thirty years after its institution. The first time he notices it is Acts 2:42. when he calls it emphatically *te klasei tou artou,* the breaking of the loaf, a name at the time of his writing, A. D. 64, universally understood. For, says he, in recording the piety and devotion  of  the  first  converts,  'they  continued  steadfast  in  the teaching of the Apostles, in the fellowship, in *the breaking of the loaf,* in the prayers — praising God.' It is true, there is more than breaking a loaf in this institution. But, in accordance with general, if not universal usage, either that which is first or most prominent in laws, institutions, and usages, gives a name to them. Thus we have our *Habeas Corpus,* our *Fieri Facias,* our *Nisi* *Prius,* our *Capias,* our *Venditioni Exponas,* names given from the first words of the law. 

But  to  break  a  loaf,  or  *to  break  bread,*  was  a  phrase  common amongst the Jews to denote ordinary eating for refreshment. For example, Acts 2:46. 'Daily, with one accord, they continued in the temple and in breaking bread from house to house. They ate their *food* with gladness and simplicity of heart.' Also, after Paul had restored Eutychus at Troas, we are informed he brake a loaf and ate.  Here  it  must  refer  to  himself,  not  only  because  it  is  used *indefinitely,* but because he that eats is the same number with him that breaks a loaf. But when an established usage is referred to, the article or some definite term ascertains what is alluded to. Thus, Acts 2:42. it is '*the* breaking of *the* loaf.' And Acts 20:7. it is 'They assembled for *the* breaking of the loaf.' This loaf is explained by Paul,  1  Cor.  10:16.  '*The*  loaf  which  we  break,  is  it  not  the communion of the body of Christ.' This proposition being now, as we judge, sufficiently evident, we shall proceed to state our sixth. 

***Proposition 6 – The breaking of the loaf and the      drinking of the cup are commemorative of the Lord's death.*** 

Upon the loaf and upon the cup of the Lord, in letters which speak not  to  the  eye,  but  to  the  heart  of  every  disciple,  is  inscribed, "*When this you see, remember me.*" Indeed, the Lord says to each disciple, when he receives the symbols into his hand, 'This is my body broken for *you.* This is my blood shed for *you.*' The loaf is thus  constituted  a  representation  of  his  body — first  whole,  then wounded for our sins. The cup is thus instituted a representation of his blood — once his life, but now poured out to cleanse us from our sins. To every disciple he says, For *you* my body was wounded; for *you* my life was taken. In receiving it the disciple says, "Lord, I believe it. My life sprung from thy suffering;  my joy from thy sorrows; and my hope of glory everlasting from thy humiliation and  abasement  even  to  death."  Each  disciple,  in  handing  the symbols to his fellow-disciple, says, in effect, "You, my brother, once an alien, are now a citizen of heaven; once a stranger, are now brought home to the family of God. You have owned my Lord as your Lord, my people as your people. Under Jesus the Messiah we are one. Mutually embraced in the everlasting arms, I embrace you in mine: thy sorrows shall be my sorrows, and thy joys my joys. Joint debtors to the favor of God and the love of Jesus, we shall jointly suffer with him, that we may jointly reign with him. Let us, then, renew our strength, remember our King, and hold fast our boasted hope unshaken to the end." 

- Blest be the tie that binds  

`  `Our hearts in Christian love;  

`  `The fellowship of kindred minds    Is like to that above."  

` `Here  he  knows  no  man  after  the  flesh.  Ties  that  spring  from eternal love, revealed in blood, and addressed to his senses, draw forth all that is within him of complacent affection and feeling, to those joint heirs with him of the grace of eternal life. While it represents to him '*the bread of life*' — all the salvation of the Lord — it is the strength of his faith, the joy of his hope, and the life of his love.13

This  institution  commemorates  the  love  which  reconciled  us  to God, and always furnishes us with a new argument to live for him who died for us. Him who feels not the eloquence and power of this argument, all other arguments assail in vain. God's goodness, developed in creation and in his providence, is well designed to lead men to reformation. But the heart, on which these fail, and to which  Calvary  appeals  in  vain,  is  past  feeling,  obdurate,  and irreclaimable, beyond the operation of any moral power known to mortal man. 

Every time the disciples assemble around the Lord's table, they are furnished with a new argument also against sin, as well as with a new proof of the love of God. It is as well intended to crucify the world in our hearts, as to quicken us to God, and to diffuse his love within us. Hence it must in reason be a stated part of the Christian worship,  in  all  Christian  assemblies;  which  leads  us  to  state, illustrate, and sustain the following capital proposition, to which the preceding six are all preliminary. 

***Proposition 7 – The breaking of the one loaf, and the    joint participation of the cup of the Lord, in             commemoration of the Lord's death, usually called "the Lord's Supper," is an instituted part of the worship and edification of all Christian congregations in all their    stated meetings.*** 

***Argument*  1**.  The  first  Christian  congregation  which  met  in Jerusalem, and which was constituted by the twelve Apostles, did as  statedly  attend  upon  the  breaking  of  the  loaf  in  their  public meetings, as they did upon any other part of the Christian worship. So  Luke  records,  Acts  2:42.  'They  continued  steadfast  in  the Apostles' doctrine, in the fellowship, in *the breaking of the loaf,* and in the prayers.' Ought we not, then, to continue as steadfast in the breaking of the loaf, as in the teaching of the Apostles, as in the fellowship, as in the prayers commanded by the Apostles? 

***Argument* 2**. The Apostles taught the churches to do all the Lord commanded. Whatever, then, the churches did by the appointment or concurrence of the Apostles, they did by the commandment of Jesus  Christ.  Whatever  acts  of  religious  worship  the  Apostles taught and sanctioned in one Christian congregation, they taught and sanctioned in all Christian congregations, because all under the same government of one and the same King. But the church in Troas met upon the first  day of the week, consequently all the churches met upon the first day of the week for religious purposes. 

Among  the  acts  of  worship,  or  the  institutions  of  the  Lord,  to which the disciples attended in these meetings, the breaking of the loaf was so conspicuous and so important, that the churches are said to meet on the first day of the week for this purpose. We are expressly told that the disciples at Troas met for this purpose; and what one church did by the authority of the Lord, as a part of his instituted worship, they all did. That the disciples in Troas met for this purpose is not to be inferred; for Luke says positively, Acts 20:7.) 'And on the first day of the week, when the disciples came together for the breaking of the loaf, Paul, being about to depart on the  morrow,  discoursed  with  them,  and  lengthened  out  his discourse till midnight.' From the manner in which this meeting of the disciples at Troas is mentioned by the historian, two things are very obvious — 1st. That it was an established custom or rule for the disciples to meet on the first day of the week. 2d. That the primary object of their meeting was to break the loaf. They who object to breaking the loaf on the first day of every week when the disciples are assembled, usually preface their objections by telling us, that Luke does not say they broke the loaf *every* first day; and yet they contend against the Sabbatarians, that they ought to observe *every* first day to the Lord in commemoration of his resurrection. The Sabbatarians  raise  the  same  objection  to  this  passage,  when adduced by all professors of Christianity to authorize the weekly observance of the first day. They say that Luke does not tell us, that they met for any religious purpose on *every* first day. How inconsistent,  then,  are  they  who  make  this  sentence  an  express precedent for observing *every* first day, when arguing against the Sabbatarians, and then turn round and tell us, that it will not prove that they broke the loaf *every* first day! If it does not prove the one, it  is  most  obvious  it  will  not  prove  the  other;  for  the  weekly observance of this day, as a day of the meeting of the disciples, and the weekly breaking of the loaf in those meetings, stand or fall together. Hear it again: 'And on the first day of the week, when the disciples assembled to break the loaf.' Now all must confess, who regard the meaning of words, that the meeting of the disciples and the breaking of the loaf, as far as these words are concerned, are expressed in the same terms as respects the frequency. If the one was *fifty-two* times in a year, or only *once;* so was the other. If they met every first day, they broke the loaf every first day; and if they did not break the loaf every first day, they did not meet every first day. But we argue from the style of Luke, or from his manner of 

The definite article is,  in  the Greek and in  the English tongue, prefixed to stated fixed times, and its appearance here is not merely definitive of one day, but expressive of a stated or fixed day. This is so in all languages which have a definite article. Let us illustrate this by a very parallel and plain case. Suppose some 500 or 1000 years hence the annual observance of the 4th of July should have ceased  for  several  centuries,  and  that  some  person  or  persons devoted to the primitive institutions of this mighty Republic, were desirous of seeing the 4th of every July observed as did the fathers and founders of the Republic during the hale  and undegenerate days of primitive republican simplicity. Suppose that none of the records of the first century of this Republic had expressly stated, that it was a regular and fixed custom for a certain class of citizens to pay a particular regard to the 4th day of every July; but that a few incidental expressions in the biography of the leading men in the Republic spoke of it as Luke has done of the meeting at Troas. How would it be managed? For instance, in the life of John Quincy Adams it is written, A. D. 1823, "And on the 4th of July, when the republicans of the city of Washington met to dine, John Q. Adams delivered an oration to them." Would not an American, a thousand years hence, in circumstances such as have been stated, find in these words *one* evidence that it was an established usage, during the  first  century  of  this  Republic,  to  regard  the  4th  of  July  as aforesaid. He would tell his opponents to mark, that it was not said that on *a* fourth of July, as if it were a particular occurrence; but it was, in the fixed meaning of the English language expressive of a fixed and stated day of peculiar observance. At all events, he could not fail in convincing the most stupid, that the primary intention of that meeting was *to dine.* Whatever might be the frequency or the intention  of  that  dinner,  it  must  be  confessed,  from  the  words 

above cited, that they *met to dine.* 

Another  circumstance  that  must  somewhat  confound  the Sabbatarians, and the lawless observers of the breaking of the loaf, may  be  easily  gathered  from  Luke's  narrative.  Paul  and  his company arrived at Troas either on the evening of the first day, or on Monday morning at an early hour; for he departed on Monday morning, as we term it, at an early hour; and we are positively told that he tarried just seven days at Troas. Now, had the disciples been Sabbatarians, or observed the seventh day as a Sabbath, and broke the loaf on it as the Sabbatarians do, they would not have deferred  their  meeting  till  the  first  day,  and  kept  Paul  and  his company waiting, as he was evidently in a great haste at this time. But his tarrying *seven* days, and his early departure on Monday morning, corroborates the evidence adduced in proof, that the first day of the week was the *fixed* and *stated* day, for the disciples to meet for this purpose.14

From the 2d of the Acts, then, we learn that *the breaking of the loaf,*  was  a  stated  part  of  the  worship  of  the  disciples  in  their meetings; and from the 20th we learn, that the first day of the week was the stated time for those meetings; and above all, we ought to notice that the most prominent object of their meeting was to break the loaf. Other corroborating evidences of the stated meeting of the disciples on the first day for religious purposes, are found in the fact, that Paul says he had given order to all the congregations in Galatia, as well as that in Corinth, to attend to the fellowship, or the laying up of contributions for the poor saints on the first day of every week. 'On the first day of *every week* let each of you lay somewhat by itself, according as he may have prospered, putting it into the treasury, that when I come there may be no collections'15

for the saints. *Kata mian Sabbaton* Macknight justly renders, '*the first day of  every week;*' for  every linguist will admit  that  *kata polin* means every city; *kata menan,* every month; *kata ecclesian,* every  church;  and,  therefore,  in  the  same  usage,  *kata  mian Sabbaton* means the first day of every week. 

Now this prepares the way for asserting not only, that the disciples in Troas assembled on the first day of every week for 'the breaking of the loaf,' but also for adducing a third argument: —  

***Argument* 3**. The congregation in Corinth met every first day, or the first day of every week, for showing forth the Lord's death. Let the reader bear in mind that he has just heard that Paul commanded the  church  in  Corinth,  or  every  saint  in  Corinth,  to  contribute according to his ability, by putting into the treasury every first day his  contributions  to  avoid  collections  when  Paul  came.  This  is agreed on all hands  to  prove the weekly meeting of the saints. Now, with this concession in mind, we have only to notice what is said, chap. 11: 20. 'When you come together in one place, that is, every week at least, *this is not to eat the Lord's supper.*' To act thus is unworthy of the object of your meeting. To act thus is not to eat the Lord's supper. It is not to show forth the Lord's death. Thereby declaring that this is the chief object of meeting. When a teacher reproves his pupils for wasting time, he cannot remind them more forcibly of the object of coming to school, nor reprove them with more point, than to say, 'When you act thus, this is not to assemble to learn.' This is the exact import of the Apostle's address, 'When you assemble thus, it is *not* to eat the Lord's supper.' We have seen, then, that the saints met every first day in Corinth; and when they assembled  in  one  place  it  was  to  eat  the  Lord's  supper,  a declaration  of  the  practice  of  the  primitive  congregations  as explicit as could incidentally be given, differing only from a direct command in the form in which it is expressed. But it is agreed on all  hands,  that  whatsoever  the  congregations  did  with  the approbation of the Apostles, they did by their authority. For the Apostles  gave  them  all  the  Christian  institutions.  Now  as  the Apostle  Paul  approbated  their  meeting  every  week,  and  their coming  together  into  one  place  to  show  forth  the  Lord's death; — and only censured their departure from the meaning of the institution,  it  is  as  high  authority  as  we  could  require  for  the practice of the weekly meeting of the disciples. 

But when Acts 2:42; Acts 20:7. 1 Cor. 11:20 and chap. 16: 1 & 2, are compared and added together, it appears that we act under the influence of apostolic teaching and precedent, when we meet every Lord's day  for the breaking of the loaf. But this is  still farther demonstrated  by  a  fourth  argument  drawn  from  the  following fact: —  

***Argument* 4**. *No example can be adduced from the New Testament of any Christian congregation assembling on the first day of the week,  unless  for  the  breaking  of  the  loaf.*  Let  an  example  be adduced by those who teach that Christians ought to meet on the first day of the week not to break the loaf, and then, but not till then, can they impugn the above fact. Till this is done, a denial of it  must  appear  futile  in  the  extreme.  The  argument,  then,  is, Christians have no authority, nor are under any obligations to meet on  the  Lord's  day,  from  anything  which  the  Apostles  said  or practiced, unless it be to show forth the Lord's death, and to attend to those means of edification and comfort connected with it. 

***Argument* 5**. If it be not the duty and privilege of every Christian congregation to assemble on the first day of every week to show forth the Lord's death, it will be difficult, if not impossible, from either scripture or reason, to show that it is their duty or privilege to meet monthly, quarterly, semi-annually, annually, or indeed, at all, for this purpose. For from what premises can any person show that it is a duty or privilege to assemble monthly, which will not prove  that  it  is  obligatory  to  meet  weekly?  We  challenge investigation here, and affirm that no man can produce a single reason,  why  it  should  or  could  be  a  duty  or  a  privilege  for  a congregation to meet monthly, quarterly, or annually, which will not prove that it is its duty and privilege to assemble every first day for this purpose. 

***Argument*  6**.  Spiritual  health,  as  well  as  corporeal  health,  is dependent on food. It is requisite for corporeal health, that the food not only be salutary in its nature, and sufficient in its quantity, but that it be received at proper intervals, and these regular and fixed. Is it otherwise with moral health? Is there no analogy between the bread which perishes, and the bread of life Is there no analogy between natural and moral life — between natural and moral health? and, if there be, does it not follow, that if the primitive disciples only enjoyed good moral health, when they assembled weekly to show forth the Lord's death, that they cannot enjoy good moral health who only meet quarterly or semi-annually for this purpose? ***Argument* 7**. But in the last place, what *commemorative* institution, in any age, under any religious economy, was ordained by divine authority, which had not a fixed time for its observance? Was it the commemoration of the finishing of creation signified in the weekly Sabbath?  Was  it  the  Passover,  the  Pentecost,  the  Feast  of Tabernacles?  Was  it  the  Feast  of  Purim  either?  What  other significant usage was it, the times or occasion of whose observance were not fixed. How often was circumcision to be administered to the same subject? How often Christian immersion? Is there a single institution commemorative of anything, the meaning, or frequency, of the observance of which, is not distinctly, either by precept or example, laid down in the Holy Scriptures? Not one of a *social* character,  and  scarcely  one  of  an  individual  character.  The commemoration  of  the  Lord's  death  must,  then,  be  a  weekly institution — an institution in all the meetings of the disciples for Christian  worship;  or  it  must  be  an  anomaly — a  thing  *sui generis* — an institution like no other of divine origin. And can any one tell  why Christians  should celebrate the  Lord's resurrection *fifty-two* times in a year, and his death only *once, twice,* or *twelve* times?  He  that  can  do  this  will  not  be  lacking  in  a  lively imagination, however defection he may be in judgment, or in an acquaintance with the New Testament. 

***Objections Considered*** 

Having  written  so  much  on  this  subject  formerly,  I  shall  now introduce a few persons out of the many men of renown who, since the Reformation, have pled this cause. We shall not only introduce them to our readers, but we shall let them speak to them. —  

*John Brown,* of Haddington, author of the Dictionary of the Bible, and teacher of theology for that branch of the Presbyterian church called the "*Secession,*" has written a treatise on this subject. We shall give him the task of stating and removing the objections to this apostolic institution. The reader will perceive that there are many impurities in his style; and although his speech betrays that he  has  been  in  Ashdod,  still  his  arguments  are  weighty  and powerful. 

He  offers  various  arguments  for  the  weekly  observance  of  this institution, and states and refutes nine objections to the practice. A few of the strongest we shall quote: —  

"All  the  arguments  I  ever  knew  advanced  in  support  of  the unfrequent  administration  of  the  Lord's  supper,  appear  to  me altogether destitute of force. The following are the principal: —  

***Objection* 1**. The frequent administration of this ordinance, in the apostolic and primitive ages of Christianity, was commendable and necessary, because the continual persecutions that then raged, gave them ground to fear that every Sabbath might be their last; whereas now we are not in such danger, and therefore need not so frequent use of this ordinance. 

***Answer**.* 

` `Ought we not still to live as if every Sabbath were to be our last? Have we now a lease on our life more than these had? Did not many Christians in these times live to as great an age as we do now? Indeed, is it not evident, from the best  historians,  that  the  church  was  generally  under  no persecution  above  one-third  of  the  time,  that  weekly communion  was  practiced?  But,  say  they  had  been constantly  exposed  to  the  cruelest  persecution,  the objection becomes still more absurd. If they attended this ordinance weekly at the peril of their lives does it follow that now, when God gives us greater and better opportunity for it, we ought to omit it? Does God require the greatest work  at  his  people's  hands,  when  he  gives  least opportunity? Or does he require least work, when he gives the greatest opportunity for i? What kind of a master must God be, if this were the case? Besides, do not men need this ordinance  to  preserve  them  from  the  influence  of  the world's smiles as much as of its frowns? — "Let us invert this objection, and try if it has more force. It would then run thus: The primitive Christians received the Lord's supper weekly,  as  their  souls  were  in  greater  danger  from  the smiles  and  allurements  of  the  world,  which  are  usually found  more  hurtful  to  men's  spiritual  concerns  than  its frowns; and as they had greater opportunity for doing so by their  enjoying  peace  and  liberty;  yet  this  frequency  of administering and partaking is  not  requisite  now, as we, being under the world's frowns, are in less hazard as to our spiritual concerns; and especially, as we cannot attend upon it  but  at  the  peril  of  our  lives,  God  having  expressly declared that he loves mercy better than sacrifice. 

***Objection* 2**. The primitive and reforming times were seasons of great spiritual liveliness, and of large communications of divine influences to the souls of believers; whereas it is quite otherwise now.  Therefore,  though  frequent  administration  was  then commendable;  yet,  in  our  languishing  decayed  state,  it  is unnecessary. 

***Answer**.* 

` `Ought  we  to  repair  seldom  to  the  wells  of  salvation, because we can bring but little water at once from them? Ought we seldom to endeavor to to fill out pitchers at the fountain of living waters, because they are small? Is not this  ordinance  a  cordial  for  restoring  the  languishing, strengthening the weak, recovering the sick, and reviving the dying believer? How reasonable, then, is it to argue that languishing, weak, sick, and dying believers, must not have it often administered to them, just because they are not in perfect  health?" — "Would  not  the  objection  inverted  read better?  The  primitive  Christians  had  this  ordinance frequently  administered  to  them, because, being decayed and withered, weak and sickly, and receiving only scanty communications  of  divine  influence  at  once,  it  was necessary for them to be often taking new meals: whereas, we being now strong and lively Christians, and receiving on  these  occasion  such  large  supplies  of  grace,  as  are sufficient  to  enable  us  to  walk  many  days  under  this powerful  influence,  have  no  occasion  for  so  frequently attending on that ordinance, which is especially calculated for strengthening languishing, weak, sickly believers. 

***Objection* 3**. If the Lord's supper were frequently administered, it would become less solemn, and, in time, quite contemptible, as we see  is  the  case  with  baptism,  through  the  frequency  of  the administration of that ordinance. 

***Answer**.*  

Is this means of keeping up the credit of the Lord's supper, of God's devising or not? If it is, where is that part of his word that warrants it? The contrary I have already proved from Scripture. Since, then, it is only of man's invention, what  ground  is  there  to  hope  it  will  really  maintain  the credit and solemnity of the ordinance? Did not the Papists of old, pretend to maintain and advance its solemnity, by reduction of the frequency of administration? Did they not take away the cup from the people, which Calvin says was the native consequence of the former? Did they not annex the administration of this ordinance to those seasons which superstition  had  aggrandized;  namely,  Easter,  Pentecost, and Christmas? Did they not annex a world of ceremonies to it? Did they not pretend that it was a real sacrifice, and that the elements were changed by consecration, into the real body and blood of Christ? And, did all this tend to the support  of  the  proper  credit  of  this  ordinance?  On  the contrary,  did  it  not  destroy  it?  Though  the  doctrine  of transubstantiation procured a kind of reverence for it, yet, was this reverence divine? or, was it not rather devilish, in worshipping the elements? Now, how are we sure that our unfrequent  administration  of  this  ordinance  will  more effectually support its solemnity? Is it not strange that we should have so much encouragement from the practice of the Apostles, the primitive Christians, and the whole of the reformed churches, to profane this solemn ordinance; while the most ignorant and abandoned Papists are our original pattern, for the course that tends to support its proper honor and credit? What a strange case this must be, if, in order to support the credit of God's ordinance, we must forsake the footsteps  of  the  flock,  and  walk  in  the  paths  originally chalked out by the most ignorant and wicked antichristians? "Besides, if our unfrequent administration of this ordinance render it solemn, would it not become much more so, if administered only once in seven, ten, twenty, thirty, sixty, or a hundred years?" — "Shall we not then find, that those who pray once a month or hear a sermon once-a-year, have their  minds  far  more  religiously  impressed  with  solemn views of God, than those who pray seven times a day, and hear a hundred sermons within the year? 

"Let  us  invert  this  objection,  and see how it stands. All human devices to render God's ordinances more solemn, are impeachments of his wisdom, and have always tended to  bring  the  ordinances  into  contempt.  But  unfrequent administration  of  the  supper  is  a  human  device,  first invented  by  the  worst  Papists,  and  therefore  it  tends  to bring contempt on this ordinance, as we see sadly verified in  the  practice  of  those  who  voluntarily  communicate seldom." 

The means by which the weekly observance of the supper was set aside, Mr. Brown states in the following words: —  

"The means by which the unfrequent administration of this ordinance appears to me to have been introduced into the church, do not savor of the God of truth. The causes that occasioned  its  introduction  appear  to  have  been  pride, superstition,  covetousness,  and  carnal  complaisance.  The eastern hermits, retiring from the society of men, had taken up their residence in deserts and mountains, and, being far removed  from  the  places  of  its  administration,  seldom attended. This, though really the effect of their sloth and distance,  they  pretend  to  arise  from  their  regard  and reverence for this most solemn ordinance. It being easy to imitate  them  in  this  imaginary  holiness,  which  lay  in neglecting  the  ordinance  of  God,  many  of  the  eastern Christians left off to communicate, except at such times as superstition  had  rendered  solemn,  as  at  pasch;  and contented  themselves  with  being  spectators  on  other occasions. On account of this practice, we find the great and  eloquent  Chrysostom,  once  and  again,  bitterly exclaiming against them as guilty of the highest contempt of God and Christ; and calls their practice a most wicked custom." 

An  objection  not  formally  stated  by  Mr.  Brown,  which  I  have frequently heard, is drawn from the words, '*as often as you do this,* do it in remembrance of me.' From these words, it is pled that we are without law in regard to the time how often; and consequently cannot be condemned for a partial or total neglect: for 'where there is no law, there is no transgression.' 'As *often*' is used not to license the  frequency,  but  to  denote  the  manner.  'Always  do  it  in remembrance of me.' The connection in which these words occur regarding the manner or design of the observance, and not how often it may, or may not be celebrated, it is a violation of every rule of interpretation to infer another matter from them, which was not in the eye of the Apostle. Besides, if the words 'as oft' leave it discretionary  with  any  society  how  often,  they  are  blameless  if they never once, or more than once in all their lives, show forth the Savior's death.  This  interpretation makes an observance without reason, without law, without precedent, and consequently without obligation. 

Next to Mr. Brown, we shall introduce a few extracts from *William King,*  Archbishop  of  Dublin.  The  Editors  of  the  *Christian Examiner* presented a very valuable extract from Mr. King, in their 7th of May number of the first volume, from which I quote the following, pp. 163, 165, 166, 167: —  

"The following remarks on this institution of our Savior, are copies from a '*Discourse concerning the* *Inventions of Men in the Worship of God,*' by William King, of Ireland. He was born at Antrim, 1650; educated at Trinity College, Dublin; and held successively the dignities of Dean of St. Patrick's, Bishop of Derry, and Archbishop of Dublin. He died in 1729. His method, in this discourse is to examine and  compare  the  worship  of  God,  as  taught  in  the Scriptures, with the practice of the different religious sects of the day: —  

'Christ's positive command to do this in remembrance of him, etc. must oblige us in some times and in some places; and there can be no better way of determining when we are obliged  to  do  it  than  by  observing  when  God  in  his goodness  gives  us  opportunity;  for  either  we  are  then obliged to do it, or else we may choose whether we will ever do it or no; there being no better means of determining the frequency, than this of God's giving us the opportunity. And  the  same  rule  holding  in  all  other  general  positive commands, such as those that oblige us to charity, we may be sure it holds likewise in this. Therefore, whoever slights or neglects any opportunity of receiving which God afford him, does sin, as certainly as he, who, being enabled by God to perform an act of charity, and invited by a fit object, neglects  to  relieve  him,  or  shuts  up  his  bowels  of compassion against him, concerning *whom* the Scriptures assure us that the love of God dwells not in him. And the arrangement  is  rather  stronger  against  him  who  neglects this holy ordinance; for how can it be supposed *that man* has  a  true  love  for  his  Savior,  or  a  due  sense  of  his sufferings,  who  refuses  or  neglects  to  remember  the greatest  of  all  benefits,  in  the  easiest  manner,  though commanded to do it by his Redeemer, and invited by a fair opportunity of God's own offering. 

"It is manifest that if it be not our own fault, we may have an opportunity every Lord's day when we meet together; and  therefore  that  church  is  guilty  of  laying  aside  the command, whose order and worship doth not require and provide for this practice. Christ's command seems to lead us  directly  to  it:  for,  'Do  this  in  remembrance  of  me,' implies that Christ was to leave them, that they were to meet together after he was gone, and that he required them *to remember him at their meetings whilst he was absent.* The very design of our public meetings on the Lord's day, and not on the Jewish Sabbath, is, to remember and keep in our minds a sense of what Christ did and suffered for us till he come again; and this we are obliged to do, not in such a manner as our own inventions suggest, but by such means as  Christ  himself  has  prescribed  to  us,  that  is,  by celebrating this holy ordinance. 

'It seems then probable, from the very institution of this ordinance, that our Savior designed it should be a part of God's service in all the solemn assemblies of Christians, as the passover was in the assemblies of the Jews. To know, therefore,  how  often  Christ  requires  us  to  celebrate  this feast,  we have no more to  do, but  to  inquire how often Christ requires us to meet together; that is, at least every Lord's day.'" 

Next we shall introduce an American Rabbi of very great celebrity, Dr. John Mason, of New York. The passages which I quote are found in a note attached to page 188th of the New York Edition of Fuller's Strictures on Sandemanianism. 

"Mr.  Fuller  does  not  deny  that  the  Lord's  Supper  was observed by the first Christians every Lord's day, (nor will this be denied by any man who has candidly investigated the subject,) but he seems to think that Acts 20:7. does not prove that it was so; others, eminent for piety and depth of research,  have  considered  this  passage  as  affording  a complete  proof  of  the  weekly  observance  of  the  Lord's supper. Dr. Scott, in his valuable Commentary, observes on this  passage,  '*Breaking  of  bread,*  or  commemorating  the death of Christ in the eucharist, was one chief end of their assembling; this ordinance seems to have been *constantly administered every Lord's day,* and probably no professed Christians absented themselves from it, after they had been admitted  into  the  church;  unless  they  lay  under  some censure, or had some real hindrance.' 

"Dr.  Mason,  of  this  city,  in  his  Letters  on  Frequent Communion,  speaks  on  this  subject  with  still  greater decision. 'It is notorious, that during the first three centuries of  the  Christian  era,  communions  were  held  with  the frequency of which, among us, we have neither example nor  resemblance.  It  is  also  notorious,  that  the  original frequency  of  communions  declined  as  carnality  and corruption gained ground. And it is no less notorious, that it has been urged as a weighty duty by the best of men, and the best churches, in the best of times.' 

"Weekly  communion  did  not  die  with  the  Apostles  and their  contemporaries.  There  is  a  cloud  of  witnesses  to testify  that  they  were  kept  up  by  succeeding  Christians, with great care and tenderness, for above two centuries. It is not necessary to swell these pages with quotations. The fact is indisputable. 

"Communion  every  Lord's  day,  was  universal,  and  was preserved in the Greek church till the seventh century; and such  as  neglected  *three  weeks*  together  were excommunicated. 

"In this manner did the spirit of ancient piety cherish the memory of the Savior's love. There was no need of reproof, remonstrance, or entreaty. No trifling excuses for neglect were ever heard from the lips of a Christian; for  *such* a neglect  had  not  yet  degraded  the  Christian's  name.  He carried in his own bosom sufficient inducements to obey, without  reluctance,  the  precepts  of  his  Lord.  It  was  his choice, his consolation, his joy. These were days of life and glory;  but  days  of  dishonor  and  death  were  shortly  to succeed; nor was there a more ominous symptom of their approach, than the decline of frequent communicating. For as the power of religion appears in a solicitude to magnify the  Lord  Jesus  continually,  so  the  decay  of  it  is  first detected by the encroachments of indifference. It was in the *fourth* century, that the church began very discernibly to forsake her first love. 

"The  excellent  Calvin  complains  that  in  this  day, professors, conceiting that they had fully discharged their duty by a single communion, resigned themselves for the rest of the year, to supineness and sloth. 'It ought to have been,' says he, 'far otherwise. *Every week,* at least, the table of  the  Lord  should  have  been  spread  for  Christian 

assemblies; and the promises declared, by which, partaking of it, we might be spiritually fed.'"16

We  shall  now  hear  the  celebrated  John  Wesley.  After  *fifty  five* years' reflection upon the subject, he decides that Christians should show forth the Lord's death every Lord's day. He prefaces 106th Sermon, Luke 22:19, with this remark: —  

"This discourse was written above fifty and five years ago, for the use of my pupils at Oxford. I have added very little, but retrenched much; as I then used more words than I now do. But I thank God, I have not yet seen cause to alter my sentiments in any point which is therein delivered." 

The  Sermon  is  titled  "The  Duty  of  Constant  Communion," concerning which the Reformer says —  

"It is no wonder that men who have no fear of God, should never think of doing this. But it is strange that it should be neglected by any that do fear God, and desire to save their souls; and yet nothing is more common. One reason why many neglect it it, they are so much afraid of *eating and drinking  unworthily,*  that  they  never  think  how  much greater the danger is, when they do not eat or drink at all." 

In speaking of *constantly* receiving the supper, Mr. Wesley says —  

"I say *constantly* receiving. For as to the phrase *frequent* communion,  it  is  absurd  to  the  last  degree.  If  it  means anything  else  but  constant,  it  means  more  than  can  be proved to be the duty of any man. For if we are not obliged to  communicate  *constantly,*  by  what  argument  can  it  be proved  that  we  are  obliged  to  communicate  *frequently?* yea, more than once a year? or once in seven years? or once before  we  die?  Every  argument  brought  for  this,  either proves that we ought to do it *constantly,* or proves nothing at  all.  Therefore  that  undeterminate  unmeaning  way  of speaking,  ought  to  be  laid  aside  by  all  by  all  men  of understanding.  Our  power  is  the  only  rule  of  our  duty. Whatever we can do, that we ought. With respect either to this, or any other command, he that, when he may obey if he will, does not, will have no place in the kingdom of heaven." 

Though we may have some objections to the style in which John Wesley  speaks  of  the  meaning  of  this  institution,  as  we  have indeed to that of all the others from whom we have quoted, yet we would recommend to the whole Methodistic community the close perusal  of  the  above  Sermon.  It  will  be  found  in  vol.  3,  pp. 171-179. 

The Elders among the Methodists, with whom John Wesley is such high authority, we would remind of his *advice,* found in his Letters to America, 1784, lately quoted in the Gospel Herald, Lexington, Kentucky.  

"**I also advise the elders to administer the supper of the lord on every lord's day**." 

So much for John Brown, John Mason, and John Wesley, and the authorities which they quoted. While quoting the sayings of the Johns, I am reminded of something said by the great John Milton, the "immortal bard" of England. In his posthumous works, he says; "The Lord's supper (which the doctrine of transubstantiation, or rather anthropophagy, has well nigh converted into a banquet of cannibals,) is essential to be observed, and may be administered by any one with propriety, as well as by an appointed minister. There is no order of men which can claim to itself either the right of distribution,  or  the  power  of  withholding  the  sacred  elements, seeing that in the church we are all alike priests." "The master of a family, or any one appointed by him, is at liberty to celebrate the Lord's supper from house to house, as was done in the dispensation of the passover" — "all Christians are a royal priesthood: therefore any believer is competent to act as an ordinary minister according as convenience may require, provided only he be endowed with the necessary gifts, these gifts constituting his commission." Thus did the famous John Milton make way for the weekly observance of the supper, by divesting it of the priestly appendages and penances of the dark ages. 

A cloud of witnesses to the plainness and evidence of the New Testament on the subject of the weekly celebration of the Lord's Supper, might be adduced. But this we think unnecessary; and as we would avoid prolixity and tediousness, we shall only add a few extracts from the third volume of the *Christian Baptist,* 2d edt. p. 254, in proof of the assertion — *all antiquity is on the side of the disciples meeting every first day to break the loaf.* —  

All antiquity concurs in evincing that, for the *three first centuries,* all the churches broke bread once a week. Pliny, in his Epistles, Book 10: Justin Martyr, in his Second Apology for the Christians, and Tertullian, De Ora. page 135, testify that it was the universal practice in all the weekly assemblies of the brethren, after they had prayed and sung praises— 

'Then bread and wine being brought to the *chief brother,* he taketh it and offereth praise and thanksgiving to the Father, in the name of the Son and Holy Spirit. After prayer and thanksgiving,  the  whole  assembly  saith,  *Amen!*  When thanksgiving is ended by the *chief guide,* and the consent of the whole people, the *deacons* (as we call them) give to every one present part of the bread and wine, over which thanks are given.' 

"The weekly communion was prepared in the Greek church till the *seventh century;* and, by one of their canons, 'such as  neglected  *three  weeks  together,*  were excommunicated.'17

"In the *fourth century,* when all things began to be changed by baptized Pagans, the practice began to decline. Some of the councils in the western part of the Roman Empire, by their  canons,  strove  to  keep  it  up.  The  council  held  at Illiberis  in  Spain,  A. D.  324,  decreed  that  'no  offerings should be received from such as did not receive the Lord's Supper.'18

"The council at Antioch, A. D. 341, decreed that 'all who came  to  church,  and  heard  the  Scriptures  read,  but afterwards  joined  not  in  prayer,  and  receiving  the 

sacrament, should be cast out of the church, till such time as they gave public proof of their repentance.'19

"All these canons were unable to keep the carnal crowd of professors  in  a  practice  for  which  they  had  no  spiritual taste; and, indeed, it was likely to get out of use altogether. To  prevent  this,  the  Council  of  Agatha,  in  Languedoc, A. D.  506,  decreed  that  'none  should  be  esteemed  good Christians who did not *communicate* at least *three times* a year — at  Christmas,  Easter,  and  Whitsunday.'20  This  soon became the standard of a good Christian, and it was judged presumptuous to commune oftener. 

"Things went on in this way for more than 600 years, until they got tired of even *three* communications in one year; and  the  infamous  Council  of  Lateran,  which  decreed auricular confession and transubstantiation, decreed that 'an annual  communion  at  Easter  was  sufficient.'  This association  of  the  'sacrament'  with  Easter,  and  the mechanical devotion of the ignorant at this season, greatly 

contributed to the worship of the Host.21 Thus the breaking of  bread  in  simplicity  and  godly  sincerity  once-a-week, degenerated  into  a  pompous  sacrament  once-a-year  at Easter. 

"At  the  Reformation  this  subject  was  but  slightly investigated by the reformers. Some of them, however, paid some attention to it. Even Calvin, in his Institutes, lib. 4. chap.  17:  sect.  46,  says,  'And  truly  this  custom,  which enjoins  communicating  once-a-year,  *is  a  most  evident contrivance of the Devil,* by whose instrumentality soever it may have been determined.' 

"And again  (Inst.  lib. 6, chap. 18:  sect.  56,) he says,  'It ought to have been far otherwise. *Every week,* at least, the table of the  Lord should have been spread for Christian assemblies,  and  the  promises  declared  by  which,  in partaking of it, we might be spiritually fed.' 

"Martin Chemnitz, Witsius, Calderwood, and others of the reformers and controversialists, concur with Calvin; and, indeed, almost every commentator on the New Testament concurs with the Presbyterian Henry in the remarks on Acts 20:7. 'In the primitive times  it was the  custom of many churches to receive the Lord's supper every Lord's day.' 

"The  Belgic  reformed  church,  in  1851,  appointed  the supper  to  be  received  every  other  month.  The  reformed churches  of  France,  after  saying  that  they  had  been  too remiss in observing the supper but four times a year, advise a *greater  frequency.*  The church of Scotland began with *four* sacraments in a year; but some of her ministers got up to *twelve* times. Thus things stood till the close of the last century. 

"Since  the  commencement  of  the  present  century,  many congregations in England, Scotland, Ireland, and some in the  United  States  and  Canada,  both  Independents  and Baptists, have attended upon the supper every Lord's day, and the practice is every day gaining ground. 

"These historical notices may be of some use to those who are ever and anon crying out *Innovation! Innovation!* But we  advocate  the  principle  and  the  practice  on  apostolic grounds alone. Blessed is the servant, who, knowing his Master's will, doeth it with expedition and delight! 

"Those who would wish to see an able refutation of the Presbyterian  mode  of  observing  the  sacrament,  and  a defence of weekly communion, would do well to read Dr. John  Mason's  Letters  on  Frequent  Communion,  who  is himself  a  high  toned  Presbyterian,  and  consequently  his remarks will be more regarded by his brethren than mine." 

Thus  our  seventh  proposition  is  sustained  by  the  explicit declarations of the New Testament, by the reasonableness of the thing itself when suggested by the Apostles, by analogy, by the conclusions of the most eminent reformers, and by the concurrent voice of all Christian antiquity. But on the plain sayings of the Lord and his Apostles, we rely for authority and instruction upon *this* and *every other* Christian institution. 

It  does,  indeed,  appear  somewhat  incongruous,  that  arguments should have to be submitted to urge Christians to convene weekly around the Lord's table. Much more in accordance with the genius of  our  religion  would  it  be,  to  see  them  over  solicitous  to  be honored with a seat at the King's table, and asking with intense interest, might they be permitted so often to eat in his presence, and  in  honor  of  his  love.  To  have  to  withstand  their  daily convocations for this purpose, would not be a task so unnatural and so unreasonable, as to have to reason and expostulate with them, to urge them to assemble for weekly communion. 

But as the want of appetite for our animal sustenance is a symptom of  ill  health,  or  approaching  disease;  so  a  want  of  relish  for spiritual food is indicative of a want to spiritual health, or of the presence of a moral disease, which, if not healed, must issue in apostasy from the Living Head. Hence among the most equivocal prognosis  of  a  spiritual  decline,  the  most  decisive  is  a  want  to appetite for the nourishment, which the Good Physician prepared and prescribed for his family. A healthy and vigorous Christian, excluded from the use and enjoyment of all the provisions of the Lord's house cannot be found. 

But much depends upon the *manner* of celebrating the supper, as well  as  upon  the  *frequency.*  The  simplicity  of  the  Christian institution runs through every part of it. While there is the form of doing every thing, there is all attention to the thing signified. But there is the form as well as the substance, and every thing that is done, must be done in some manner. The well bred Christian is like  the  well  bred  gentleman — his  manners  are  graceful,  easy, artless,  and  simple.  All  stiffness  and  forced  formality  are  as graceless in the Christian as in the gentleman. A courteous and polite family differs exceedingly from a soldier's mess mates or a ship's crew, in all the ceremonies of the table. There is a Christian decency and a Christian order, as well as political courtesy and complaisance. 

Nothing  is  more  disgusting  than  mimicry.  It  is  hypocrisy  in manners, which, like hypocrisy in religion, is more odious than apathy  or  vulgarity.  There  is  a  saintishness  in  demeanor  and appearance, which differs as much from sanctity, as foppery from politeness. The appearance of sanctimoniousness is as much to be avoided as actual licentiousness of morals. An austere and rigid pharisaism sits as awkwardly upon a Christian, as a mourning habit upon  a  bride.  Cheerfulness  is  not  mirth — solemnity  is  not pharisaism — joy is not noise — nor eating, festivity. 

But to act right in anything we must feel right. If we would show love, we must first possess it. If a person would walk humbly, he must  be  humble:  and  if  one  would  act  the  Christian  on  any occasion,  he must always live the Christian. Persons who daily converse  with  God,  and  who  constantly  meditate  upon  his salvation,  will  not  need  to  be  told  how  they  should  demean themselves at the Lord's table. 

The following extract from my Memorandum Book furnishes the nighest approach to the model, which we have in our eye, of good order and Christian decency in celebrating this institution. Indeed, the whole order of that congregation was comely: —  

"The church in  —  —  —  —  consisted of about fifty members. Not having any person whom they regarded as filling Paul's outlines  of  a  Bishop,  they  had  appointed  two  senior members, of a very grave deportment, to preside in their meetings. These persons were not competent to labor in the word and teaching; but they were qualified to rule well, and to preside with Christian dignity. One of them presided at each meeting. After they had assembled in the morning, which was at eleven o'clock, (for they had agreed to meet at eleven  and  to  adjourn  at  two  o'clock  during  the  Winter season,) and after they had saluted one another in a very familiar  and  cordial  manner,  as  brethren  are  wont  to  do who  meet  for  social  purposes;  the  president  for  the  day arose and said: 'Brethren, being assembled in the name and by the authority of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, on this day  of  his  resurrection,  let  us  unite  in  celebrating  his praise.' He then repeated the following stanza: —  

- Christ the Lord is risen to-day!  

`  `Sons of men and angels say;  

`  `Raise your joys and triumphs high,    Sing, O heavens! and, earth, reply!"  

` `"The congregation arose and sang this psalm in animating strains.  He  then  called  upon  a  brother,  who  was  a  very distinct  and  emphatic  reader,  to  read  a  section  of  the evangelical history. He arose and read, in a very audible voice, the history of the crucifixion of the Messiah. After a pause  of  a  few  moments,  the  president  called  upon  a brother to pray in the name of the congregation. His prayer abounded with thanksgivings to the Father of Mercies, and with supplications for such blessings on themselves and for all men as were promised to those who ask, or for which men  were  commanded  to  pray.  The  language  was  very appropriate; no unmeaning repetitions, no labor of words, no effort to say anything and every thing that came into his mind; but to express slowly, distinctly, and emphatically, the  desires  of  the  heart.  The  prayer  was  comparatively short;  and  the  whole  congregation,  brethren  and  sisters, pronounced aloud the final *Amen.* 

"After prayer a passage in one of the Epistles was read by the president himself, and a song was called for. A brother arose, and after naming the page, repeated —  

"' Twas on that night when doom'd to know   That eager rage of every foe;  

`  `That night in which he was betray'd  

`  `The Savior of the world took bread."  

` `"He then sat down, and the congregation sang with much feeling. 

"I observed that the table was furnished before the disciples met in the morning, and that the disciples occupied a few benches on each side of it, while the strangers sat off on seats more remote. The president arose and said that our Lord had a table for his  friends, and that he invited his disciples to sup with him. 'In memory of his death, this monumental table,' said he, 'was instituted; and as the Lord ever lives in heaven, so he ever lives in the hearts of his people.  As  the  first  disciples,  taught  by  the  Apostles  in person,  came  together  into  one  place  to  eat  the  Lord's supper, and as they selected the first day of the week in honor of his resurrection, for this purpose; so we, having the same Lord, the same faith, the same hope with them, have vowed to do as they did. We owe as much to the Lord as they; and ought to love, honor, and obey him as they.' Thus having spoken, he took a small loaf from the table, and  in  one  or  two  periods  gave  thanks  for  it.  After thanksgiving,  he  raised  it  in  his  hand,  and  significantly brake it, and handed it to the disciples on each side of him, who passed the broken loaf from one to another, until they all partook of it. There was no stiffness, no formality, no pageantry; all was easy, familiar, solemn, cheerful. He then took the cup in a similar manner, and returned thanks for it, and  handed  it  to  the  disciples  sitting  next  to  him,  who passed it round; each one waiting upon his brother, until all were served. The thanksgiving before the breaking of the loaf,  and  the  disturbing  of  the  cup,  were  as  brief  and pertinent to the occasion, as the thanks usually presented at a common table for the ordinary blessing of God's bounty. They then arose, and with one consent sang —  

- To him that lov'd the sons of men,   And washed us in his blood;  

  `  `To royal honors rais'd our heads,    And made us priests to God!"  

` `"The  president  of  the  meeting  called  upon  a  brother  to remember the poor, and those ignorant of the way of life, before  the  Lord.  He  kneeled  down  and  the  brethren  all united with him in supplicating the Father of Mercies in behalf of all the sons and daughters of affliction; the poor and the destitute, and in behalf of the conversion of the world. After this prayer the fellowship, or contribution, was attended to; and the whole church proved the sincerity of their desires, by the cheerfulness and liberality which they seemed to evince, in putting into the treasury as the Lord had prospered them. 

"A general invitation was tendered to all the brotherhood if they  had  anything  to  propose  or  inquire,  tending  to  the edification  of  the  body.  Several  brethren  arose  in succession, and read several passages in the Old and New Testaments,  relative  to  some  matters  which  had  been subjects  of  former  investigation  and  inquiry.  Sundry remarks  were  made;  and  after  singing  several  spiritual songs selected by the brethren, the president, on motion of a brother who signified that the hour of adjournment had arrived,  concluded  the  meeting  by  pronouncing  the apostolic benediction. 

"I understand that all these items were attended to in all their  meetings;  yet  the  order  of  attendance  was  not invariably the same. On all the occasions on which I was present  with  them,  no  person  arose  of  speak  without invitation, or without asking permission of the president, and no person finally left the meeting before the hour of adjournment, without special leave. Nothing appeared to be done  in  a  formal  or  ceremonious  manner.  Every  thing exhibited the power of godliness as well as the form; and no  person  could  attend  to  all  that  passed  without  being edified and convinced that the Spirit of God was there. The joy, the affection, and the reverence which appeared in this little assembly, was the strongest argument in favor of their order,  and  the  best  comment  on  the  excellency  of  the Christian institution."  

1 1 Co 3:16-17.  

2 1 Pe 2:5.  

3 1 Tim. 3:15.  

4 Greek, oikos Theou.  5 Heb. 10:21.  

6 Greek, ho oikos Theou.  

7 1 Co 10:21.  

8 1 Co 10:17.  

9 Matt. 16:9.  

10 Heb. 3:6.  

11 1 Pe 2:5.  

12 Iliad 2, line 381-399. and 8, line 53-66.  

13 Christian Baptist, vol. 3, No. 1. In that volume, in the Fall of 1825, were written four essays on the breaking of bread, which see.  

14 C. B. pp. 211-212.  

15 1 Co 16:2.  

16 Mason's Letters on Frequent Communion, pp. 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, and 42. Edinburgh Edition, 1799.  

17 Erskine's Dissertations, p. 271.  

18 Council Illib. Can. 28.  

19 Council Antioch. Son 2:1-17.  

20 Coun, Agatha, Can. 18.  

21 Bingham's Ori. B. 15: C. 9.  

