Part II: Foundation of Christian Union 

Introduction 

'I  pray —  —  — for  those  who  shall  believe  on  me  through  their teaching, *that all may be one;* that as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, *they also may be in us, that the world may believe* that thou hast sent me, and that thou gavest me the glory, which I have given them, that *they may be one,* as we are one; I in them, and thou in me, *that their union may be perfected:* and that *the world may know* that thou hast sent me, and that thou lovest them as thou lovest me.' Thus Messiah prayed; and well might he pray thus, seeing he was wise enough to teach that, 'If a kingdom be torn by factions, that kingdom cannot subsist. And if a family be torn by factions,  that  family  cannot  subsist.  By  civil  dissensions,  any kingdom  can  be  desolated;  and  no  city  or  family,  where  such dissensions are, can subsist.' 

If this be true — and true it is; if Jesus be the Messiah — in what moral desolation is the kingdom of Jesus Christ! — Was there at any time, or is there now, in all the earth, a kingdom more convulsed by internal broils and dissensions, than what is commonly called the church of Jesus Christ! Should any one think it lawful to paganize both the Greek and Latin churches — to eject one hundred millions of  members  of  the  Greek  and  Roman  communions,  from  the visible and invisible precincts of the Christian family or kingdom of Jesus Christ; and regard the Protestant faith and people as the only  true  faith  and  the  only  true  citizens  of  the  kingdom  of Jesus; — what then shall we say of them, contemplated as the visible kingdom, over which Jesus presides as Prophet, Priest, and King! Of  forty  millions  of  Protestants,  shall  we  constitute  the  visible kingdom of the Prince of Peace? Be it so, for the sake of argument; and what then? The Christian army is forty millions strong. But how do they muster? Under forty ensigns? — Under forty antagonist leaders?  Would  to  God  there  were  but  forty!  In  the  Geneva detachment alone, there is almost the numbers of petty chiefs. My soul sickens at the details! 

Take the English branch of the Protestant faith, — I mean England and the United States and all the islands where the English Bible is read; and how many broils, dissensions, and anathemas, may we compute?  I  will  not  attempt  to  name  the  antagonizing  creeds, feuds, and parties, that are in eternal war, under the banners of the Prince of Peace. And yet they talk of love and charity, and of the conversion of the Jews, the Turks, and Pagans!!! 

Shall we turn from the picture, lay down our pen, and languish in despair? No! For Jesus has said, 'Happy *the peace-makers,* for they shall be called *Sons of God.*' But who can make peace, when all the elements are at war? Who so enthusiastic, as to fancy that he can stem the torrent of strife, or quench the violence of sectarian fire! But the page of universal history whispers in our ears, If you tarry till all the belligerent armies lay down their arms, and make one spontaneous and simultaneous effort to unite; you will be as very a simpleton, as he that sat by the Euphrates, waiting till all its waters run into the sea. 

We are so sanguine — perhaps many will say, so visionary, as to imagine that a *nucleus* has been formed, or may be formed; around which may one day congregate all the children of God. No one, at all events, can say that it is either impious or immoral, — that it is inhuman or unchristian, to think about the present state of Christ's kingdom; or to meditate upon the possibility or practicability of any scheme of gathering together the children of God, under the ensign of the Cross alone. No one can say that such an enterprise is absolutely  chimerical,  unless  he  affirms  the  negative  of  the Messiah's  proposition,  and  declares  that  the  present  wars  and strifes must extend and multiply through all time, and that God will convert the whole world, *without answering the prayer of his Son;* or rather, on a plan adverse to that promulgated by him, and in despite of all the moral desolations which have ensued upon all the broils and battles of five hundred sects, and fifteen hundred years! 

Dare any one say, or even think in unphilanthropic or malevolent, to make an effort to rally the broken phalanxes of Zion's King, and to attempt to induce them to turn their arms from one another, against  the  common  foe? With  such  a  one,  it were  worse  than hopeless to reason, or to exchange a single argument. Shall we not rather  esteem  it  to  be  the  most  honorable,  acceptable,  and praiseworthy enterprise, that can be dared or undertaken by mortal man on this earthly stage of action? And as God has ever effected the most splendid revolutions by the most humble agents, and by means the most unlikely in the wisdom of all human schools; we think it not amiss or incongruous to make an effort, and to put out hands to the work of peace and love. 

From Messiah's  intercession  above quoted, it is incontrovertible that union is strength, and disunion, weakness; that there is a plan founded in infinite wisdom and love, by which, and which alone, the world may both *believe* and *know,* that God has sent his Son to be the Savior of the world. And like all the schemes of Heaven, it is simple to admiration. No mortal need fancy that he shall have the honor of devising either the plan of uniting Christians in one holy  band  of  zealous  co-operation,  or  of  converting  Jews  and Gentiles to the faith that Jesus is that *seed,* in whom all the families of the earth are yet to be blessed. The plan is divine. It is ordained by God; and, better still, it is already revealed. Is any one impatient to  hear  it?  Let  him  again  read  the  intercessions  of  the  Lord Messiah,  which  we  have  chosen  for  our  motto.  Let  him  then examine the two following propositions, and say whether these do not express Heaven's own scheme of augmenting and conversating the body of Christ. 

***First.** Nothing is essential to the conversion of the world, but the union and co-operation of Christians.* 

***Second.** Nothing is essential to the union of Christians, but the Apostles' teaching or testimony.* 

Or does he choose to express the plan of the Self-Existent in other words? Then he may change the order, and say, 

***First.** The testimony of the Apostles, is the only and all-sufficient means of uniting all Christians.* 

***Second.** The union of Christians with the Apostles' testimony, is all-sufficient, and alone sufficient, to the conversion of the world.* Neither truth alone, nor union alone, is sufficient to subdue the unbelieving nations; but truth and union combined, are omnipotent. They are *omnipotent,* for God is in them and with them, and has consecrated and blessed them for this very purpose. 

These  two  propositions  have  been  stated,  illustrated, developed, — and shall I say proved, in the *Christian Baptist,* and *Millennial Harbinger,* to the conviction of thousands. Indeed, one of them is as universally conceded, as it has been proposed, viz: *That the union of Christians is essential* *to the conversion of the world;*  and  though,  perhaps,  some  might  be  found  who  would question, whether, if all Christians were united, the whole world could be converted to God; there is no person, of whom we have heard,  who  admits  a  general  or  universal  prevalence  of  the gospel — in  what  is  usually  called  the  millennial  age  of  the world — and who admits that moral means will have anything to do with its introduction, who does not also admit that the union of Christians is essential to that state of things. Indeed, to suppose that all Christians will form one communion in that happy age of the world, and not before it, is to suppose a moral effect without a cause. 

The second proposition, viz. — *That the word or testimony of the Apostles is itself all-sufficient, and alone sufficient, to the union of all  Christians,*  cannot  be  rationally  doubted  by  any  person acquainted with that testimony, or who admits the competency of their inspiration to make them infallible teachers of the Christian institution.  And,  indeed,  all  who  contend  for  those  human institutions called creeds, contend for them as necessary only to the existence of a party, or while the present schisms, contentions, and dissensions exist. Therefore, all the defences of creeds, ancient and modern, while they assert that the Bible alone is the only perfect and infallible rule of faith and morals; not only concede that these symbols called creeds, are imperfect and fallible, — but, also, that these creeds never can achieve what the Bible, without them, can accomplish. 

But  how  to  do  without  them,  appears  to  be  an  insuperable difficulty to many well disposed Christians. To labor this point 

would  be  foreign  to  our  present  purpose;  especially  as  it  has already been fully discussed in the present controversy.1 

It  is,  perhaps,  altogether  sufficient  at  present  to  propose  the question, How has, what is called the church, done with them? Have  they  not  been  the  fruitful  cause  or  occasion  of  all  the discords, schisms, and parties, now existing in Christendom? And will  not  a  very  superficial  observation,  and  a  little  experience, convince every man that the rivers tend not more certainly to the sea, than creeds and human devices in religion, tend to discords and divisions. Take, for example, two of the most popular creeds of  the  present  day — the  Westminster,  and  that  of  the Methodist — with  whose  history  American  society  is  better acquainted  than  with  that  of  any  other,  and  test  the  tree  of  its fruits, — judge their tendency by their practical effects upon society. To say nothing of the lesser schisms in the party, that once formed one communion on the platform of the Westminster creed, we can now  enumerate  no  less  than  nine  separate  communions — all professing the Westminster articles, in substance or in form. These are the General Assembly in Scotland and the United States, the Cameronians or Solemn League and Covenant Presbyterians, the Burghers or Unionists, the Anti-Burghers or Seceders, the Relief Presbyterians, the Cumberland Presbyterians, and the New School, now upon the eve of being born. To these might be added those called English Presbyterians, who are now more generally known by the name of Independents and Congregationalists; and, indeed, the  Glassites  or  Sandemanians,  who  came  out  of  the  synod  of Angus and Mearns in  the  year 1728. Thus in  one hundred and ninety years, have nine or ten distinct communions originated out of the Westminster creed. Some of them, too, as discordant and 

aloof from each other, as were the Jews and Samaritans. 

Nor have the Methodists in England, Canada, and the United States done much better for their age. They now form five or six separate communions,  under  different  names.  To  say  nothing  of  the Whitefieldite Methodists, those of John Wesley, are, the Wesleyan Methodists,  the  New  Connection  of  Methodists,  the  Methodist Episcopal church, the O'Kelly Methodists, the Radicals, etc. 

And  what  shall  I  say  of  the  twelve  or  fourteen  sects  of Baptists — many of whom have as much affection for the Greek and Roman church, as for one another! It were useless to furnish other evidence in proof that human opinions, inferential reasonings, and deductions from the Bible, exhibited in the form of creeds, can never unite Christians; as all their fruits are alienation, repulsion, bickering, and schism. *No human creed in Protestant Christendom can be found, that has not made a division for every generation of its existence.* And I may add — the more thinking, inquisitive, and intelligent the community which owns a creed, the more frequent their debates and schisms. 

But the Bible will do not better, if men approach it with a set of opinions, or a human symbol in their minds. For then it is not the Bible, but the opinions in the mind, that form the bond of union. Men, indeed, had better have a *written* than an *unwritten* standard of orthodoxy, if they will  not  abandon speculation  and abstract notions, as any part of Christian faith or duty. 

But all these modes of faith and worship are based upon a mistake of the true character of Revelation, which it has long been our effort  to  correct.  With  us,  Revelation  has  nothing  to  do  with opinions,  or  abstract  reasonings;  for  it  is  founded  wholly  and entirely  upon  *facts.*  There  is  not  one  abstract  opinion,  not  one speculative view, asserted or communicated in Old Testament or New.  Moses  begins  with  asserting  facts  that  had  transpired  in creation and providence; and John ends with asserting prophetic or prospective  facts,  in  the  future  displays  of  providence  and redemption.  Facts,  then,  are  the  *alpha*  and  the  *omega*  of  both Jewish and Christian revelations. 

But  that the reader may have before his  mind in one summary view,  the  whole  scheme  of  union  and  co-operation,  which  the Living Oracles and the present state of the Christian religion in the world demand; which has been, at different times and in various manners,  illustrated  and  sustained  in  the  present  controversy, against divisions, — we shall here submit it in one period. 

*Let*  **the  bible**  *be  substituted  for  all  human  creeds;*  **facts**,  *for definitions,*  **things**,  *for  words;*  **faith**,  *for  speculation;*  **unity  of faith**, *for unity of opinion;* **the positive commandments of god**, *for  human  legislation  and  tradition;*  **piety**,  *for  ceremony;* **morality**, *for partisan zeal;* **the practice of religion**, *for the mere profession of it; — and the work is done.* 

For the illustration of the leading terms, and their correlates found in this *project,* and for a full development of our meaning, (as we may  nor  may  not  be  understood,  if  interpreted  by  the  polemic vocabulary of this age,) — we shall introduce some extracts from the *Christian  Baptist*  and  *Millennial  Harbinger,*  developing  our meaning, and containing some of the capital positions which have been fully elicited and canvassed, in a controversy of twelve years. 

1. Fact 

*Fact* means something done. The term *deed,* so common in the reign of James the First, is equivalent to our term *fact.* Truth and fact, though often confounded, are not the same. All facts are truth, but all truths are not facts. That God exists, is a truth, but not a fact; that he created the heavens and the earth, is a fact and a truth. That Paul was the Apostle of the Gentiles, is a truth, but not a fact; and that he preached Christ to the Gentiles is both a fact and a truth. The simple agreement of the terms of any proposition with the subject of that proposition, or the representation of anything as it exists, is a truth. But something must be done, acted, or effected, before  we  have  a  fact.  There  are  manythings  true  in  religion, morals, politics, and general science, which are not facts; but these are all but the correspondence of words and ideas with the things of which they treat. 

Facts have a power which logical truth has not; and therefore, we say, that facts are stubborn things. They are *things,* not *words.* The power of any fact, is the meaning; and therefore the measure of its power is the magnitude of its import. All moral facts have a moral meaning; and those are properly called moral facts, which either exhibit, develop, or form moral character. All those facts, or works of  God,  which  are  purely  physical,  exhibit  what  have  been commonly called his natural or physical perfections; and all those facts or works of God, which are purely moral, exhibit his moral character.  It  so  happens,  however,  that  all  his  works,  when properly understood, exhibit both his physical and moral character, when  viewed  in  all  their  proper  relations.  Thus  the  deluge exhibited  his  power,  his  justice,  and  his  truth;  and  therefore, displayed both his physical and moral grandeur. The turning of water into wine, apart from its design, is purely a demonstration of physical power; but when its design is apprehended, it has a moral force equal to its physical majesty. 

The work of redemption is a system of work, or deeds, on the part of Heaven, which  constitutes the most splendid series of moral facts which man or angel ever saw. And they are the proof, the argument, or the demonstration, of that regenerating proposition which presents God and *love* as two names for one idea. 

When  these  facts  are  understood,  or  brought  into  immediate contact with the mind of man, as a moral seal or archetype, they delineate the image of God upon the human soul. *All the means of grace are, therefore, only the means of impressing this seal upon the  heart;  of  bringing  these*  *moral  facts  to  make  their  full impression on the soul of man.* Testimony and faith are but the channel through which these facts, or the hand of God, draws the image on the heart and character of man. If then the fact and the testimony are both the gift of God, we may well say that faith and eternal life are also the gift of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. 

To  enumerate  the  gospel  facts  would  be  to  narrate  all  that  is recorded of the sayings and doings of Jesus Christ, from his birth to his coronation in the heavens. They are, however, concentrated in a few prominent ones, which group together all the love of God in the gift of his Son. He died for our sins, He was buried in the grave, He rose from the dead for our justification, and is ascended to the skies to prepare mansions for his disciples, comprehend the whole, or are the heads to the chapters which narrate the love of God, and display his moral majesty and glory to our view. 

These moral facts unfold all the moral grandeur of Jehovah, and make Jesus the effulgence of his glory, the express image of his substance. These are the moral seal which *testimony* conveys to the understanding, and *faith* brings to the hearts of sinners, by which God creates them anew, and forms them for his glory. It is the Spirit which bears witness — the Spirit of God and of Christ which gives the testimony, and confirms it in the disciples. But let us next proceed to *testimony.* 

2. Testimony 

The  Romans,  from  whom  we  have  borrowed  much  of  our language, called the witness the *testis.* The declaration of this *testis* is still called testimony. In reference to the material system around us, to all objects and matters of sense, the eye, the ear, the smell, the  taste,  the  feeling,  are  the  five  witnesses.  What  we  call  the evidence of sense, is, therefore, the testimony of these witnesses, which  constitute  the  five  avenues  to  the  human  mind  from  the kingdom  of  nature.  They  are  figuratively  called  witnesses,  and their  evidence,  testimony.  But  the  report  or  declaration  of intelligent beings, such as God, angels, and men, constitute what is properly and literally called *testimony.* 

As light reflected from any material object upon the eye, brings that object into contact with the eye, or enables the object to make its image on the eye, so testimony concerning any fact, brings that fact into contact with the mind, and enables it to impress itself, or to form its image upon the intellect, or mind of man. Now, be it observed,  that  as  by  our  five  external  senses  we  acquire  all information of the objects of sense around us, so by testimony, human  or  divine,  we  receive  all  our  information  upon  all  facts which are not the objects of immediate exercise of our five senses upon the things around us. 

To  appreciate  the  full  value  of  testimony  in  divine  work  of regeneration, we have only to reflect, that all the moral facts which can form moral character, after the divine model, or which  can effect  a  moral  or  religious  change  in  man,  are  found  in  the testimony of God: and that no fact can operate at all, where it is not present; or where it is not known. The love of God in the death of the Messiah, never drew a tear of gratitude or joy from any eye, or excited a grateful emotion in any heart among the nations of our race to whom the testimony never came. No fact in the history of six thousand years, no work of God in creation, providence, or redemption, has ever influenced the heart of man or woman, to whom it has not been testified. Testimony is, then, in regeneration, as necessary as the facts of which it speaks. 

The real value of anything, is the labor which it cost, and its utility when acquired. If reason and justice arbitrated all questions upon the value of property, the decision would be, that every article is worth the amount of human labor which is necessary to obtain it; and when obtained, it is again to be tried in the scales of utility. Now, as all the facts, and all the truth which can renovate human nature, are in the testimony of God; and as that testimony cost the labor  and  the  lives  of  the  wisest  and  best  that  ever  lived,  that testimony, to us, is just as valuable as the facts which it records, and the labors and the lives which it cost, and just as indispensable in the process of regeneration, as were the labors and the lives of Prophets, Apostles, and the Son of God. 

History, or narrative, whether oral or written, is only another name for testimony. When, then, we reflect how large a portion of both Testaments is occupied in history, we may judge of how much importance it is in the judgment of God. Prophecy, also, being the history of future facts, or a record of things to be done, belongs to the same chapter of facts and record. Now if all past facts, and all future facts, or all the history or testimony concerning them, was erased from the volumes of God's inspiration, how small would the remainder be! These considerations, added together, only in part exhibit the value and utility of testimony in the regeneration of mankind. But its value will be still more evident, when the proper import of the term *faith* is fully set before us. 

3. Faith 

*No testimony, no faith:* for faith is only the belief of testimony, or confidence in testimony as true. To believe without testimony, is just as impossible as to see without light. The measure, quality, and power of faith, are always found in the testimony believed. 

Where testimony begins, faith begins; and where testimony ends, faith ends. We believe Moses just as far as Moses speaks or writes: and when Moses has  recorded his  last  fact,  or  testified his  last truth, our faith in Moses terminates. His five books are, therefore, the length and breadth, the height and depth, or, in other words, the *measure,* of our faith in Moses. The *quality* or value of faith is found in the quality of value of the testimony. If the testimony be valid and authoritative, our faith is strong and operative. 'If,' says John, 'we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater,' stronger, and more worthy of credit. The value of a bank bill, is the amount of the precious metals which it represents, and the indisputable evidence of its genuineness; so the value of faith is the importance of the facts which the testimony presents, and the assurance afforded that the testimony is true. True, or unfeigned faith, may be contrasted with feigned faith; but true faith is the belief of truth: for he that believes a lie, believes in vain. 

The *power* of faith is also  the power, or moral meaning of the testimony, or of the facts which the testimony represents.  If by faith I am transported with joy, or overwhelmed in sorrow, that joy or sorrow is in the facts contained in the testimony, or in the nature and relation of those facts to me. If faith purifies the heart, works by  love,  and  overcomes  the  world,  this  power  is  in  the  facts believed. If a father has more joy in believing that a lost son has been found, than in believing that a lost sheep has been brought home to his fold, the reason of this greater joy is not in the nature of his believing, but in the nature of the facts believed. 

Here I am led to expatiate on a very popular and pernicious error of modern times. The error is, that the nature, or power and saving efficacy of faith, is not in the truth believed, but in the *nature* of our faith, or in *the manner of believing* the truth. Hence all that unmeaning jargon about the nature of faith, and all those disdainful sneers at what is called "historic faith," — as if there could be any faith  without  history,  written  or  spoken.  Who  ever  believed  in Jesus Christ, without hearing the history of him? '*How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard?*' Faith never can be more  than  the  receiving  of  testimony  as  true,  or  the  belief  of testimony;  and  if  that  testimony  be  written,  it  is  called history — though  it  is  as  much  history  when  flowing  from  the tongue, as when flowing from the pen. 

Let it be again repeated, and remembered, that there is no other manner of believing a fact, than by receiving it as true. If it is not received as true, it is not believed; and when it is believed, it is no more than regarded as true. This being conceded, then it follows, that the efficacy of faith is always in the fact believed, or the object received, and not in the nature or manner of believing. 

"Faith was bewildered much by men who meant  To make it clear, so simple in itself.  

A thought so rudimental and so plain,  

That none by comment could it plainer make.  

All faith was one. In object, not in kind,  

The difference lay. The faith that saved a soul,  And that which in the common truth believed,  

In essence, were the same. Hear, then, what faith,  True Christian faith, which brought salvation, was:  Belief in all that God revealed to men;  

Observe, in all that God revealed to men,  

In all he promised, threatened, commanded, said,  Without exception, and without a doubt."2  

` `This holds universally in all the sensitive, intellectual, and moral powers  of  man.  All  our  pleasures  and  pains,  all  our  joys  and sorrows, are the effects of the objects of sensation, reflection, faith, etc. apprehended or received, and not in the nature of the exercise of any power of capacity with which we are endowed. We shall illustrate and confirm this assertion by an appeal to the experience of all.  

Let us glance at all our sensitive powers. If, on surveying with the eye a beautiful landscape, I am pleased, and on surveying a battle field  strewed  with  the  spoils  of  death,  I  am  pained, — is  it  in accordance with truth to say, that the pleasure or the pain received was occasioned by the nature of vision, or the mode of seeing? Was it not *the sight,* the thing seen, the object of vision, which produced the pleasure and the pain? The action of looking, or the mode of seeing, was in both cases the same; but the things seen, or the  objects  of  vision,  were  different; — consequently,  the  effects produced were different. 

If  on  hearing  the  melody  of  the  grove  I  am  delighted,  and  on hearing the peals of thunder breaking to pieces the cloud, dark with horror, hanging over my head, I am terrified, — is the delight or the terror to be ascribed to the manner or nature of hearing, or to the thing heard? Is it not the thing heard, which produces the delight or the terror? 

If I am refreshed by the balmy fragrance of the opening bloom of spring, or sickened by the fetid effluvia of putrid carcasses, — are these  effects  to  be  ascribed  to  the  peculiar  nature  or  mode  of smelling, or to the thing smelt? Or when the honey and the gall come in contact with my taste, — is the sweet or the bitter to be regarded as the effect of my manner of tasting, or to the object tasted? And when I touch the ice, or the blazing torch, — is the effect or feeling produced to be imputed to the manner of feeling them, or to the thing felt? May we not, then, affirm that all the pleasures and pains of sense; all the effects of sensation; are the results, not of the manner in which our five senses are exercised, but of the objects on which they are exercised? it may be said, without in the least  invalidating  this  conclusion,  that  the  more  intimate  the exercise  of  our  senses  is  with  the  things  on  which  they  are exercised, the stronger and more forcible will be the impressions made: but still it is the object seen, heard, smelt, tasted, or felt, which affects us. 

Passing from the outward to the inward man, and on examining the powers of intellection one by one, we shall find no exception to the law  which  pervades  all  our  sensitive  powers.  It  is  neither  the faculty of perception, nor the manner of perception, but the thing perceived,  that  excites  us  to  action:  it  is  not  the  exercise  of reflection, but the thing reflected upon: it is not memory, nor the exercise  of  recollection,  but  the  thing  remembered:  it  is  not imagination, but the thing imagined: it is not reason itself, nor the exercise  of  reason,  but  the  thing  reasoned  upon,  which  affords pleasure or pain — which excites to action — which cheers, allures, consoles — which grieves, disquiets, or discommodes us. 

Ascending to our volitions and our affections, we shall find the same universality. In a word, it is not choosing, nor refusing; it is not loving, hating, fearing, desiring, nor hoping; it is not the nature of any power, faculty, or capacity of our nature, nor the simple exercise of them, but the objects or things upon which they are exercised,  which  give  us  pleasure  or  pain;  which  induce  us  to action,  or  influence  our  behavior.  Faith,  then,  or  the  power  of believing, must be an anomalous thing; a power *sui generis;* an exception  to  the  laws  under  which  every  power,  faculty,  or capacity of man is placed, unless its measure, quality, power, and efficacy be in the facts which are testified, in the objects on which it terminates. 

There is no connection of cause and effect more intimate; there is no  system  of  dependencies  more  closely  linked;  there  is  no arrangement of things more natural or necessary, than the ideas represented by the terms  *fact, testimony, faith,* and *feeling.* The first is for the last, and the two intermediates are made necessary by the force of circumstances, as the means for the end. The fact, or the thing said to be done, produces the change in the frame of mind. The testimony, or the report of the thing said or done, is essential to belief; and belief of it is necessary to bring the thing said or done to the heart. The change of heart is the end proposed in this part of the process of regeneration; and we may see that the process on the part of Heaven is, thus far, natural and rational; or, in other words, consistent with the constitution of our nature.3 

4. Confirmation of the Testimony 

   All revealed religion is based upon facts. Testimony has respect to facts  only;  and  that  testimony  may  be  credible,  it  must  be confirmed. These points are of so much importance as to deserve some  illustration,  and  much  consideration.  By  *facts*  we  always mean something said or done. The works of God and the words of God, or the things done and spoken by God, are those facts which are laid down and exhibited in the Bible as the foundation of all faith,  hope,  love,  piety,  and  humanity.  All  true  and  useful knowledge is an acquaintance with facts. And all true science is acquired from the observation and comparison of facts. But he that made the heart of man and gave him an intelligent spirit. knows that facts alone can move the affections and command the passions of man. Hence the scheme of mercy which he has discovered to the world, is all contained in, and developed by, *the works of mercy* which he has wrought. 

Facts have a meaning which the understanding apprehends, and the heart feels. According to the meaning or nature of the fact, is its effect upon us. If a friend have risked his life, or sacrificed his reputation or fortune to relieve us, we cannot but confide in him and love him. If an enemy have attempted our life, invaded our property, or attacked our reputation, we cannot, naturally, but hate him. Nothing but the command of a benefactor, or the will of some dear  friend,  who  had  laid  us  under  obligation  to  himself,  can prevent  us from hating  our enemies.  If a beloved relative have sustained some great misfortune, we must feel sorry; or if he have been rescued from some impending calamity, we must feel glad. Our joy in the latter case, and our sorrow in the former, arise from the meaning or nature of the fact. The feelings corresponding with the  nature  of  the  fact,  are  excited  or  called  into  existence  the moment the fact is known or believed. It is *known* when we have witnessed it ourselves, and it is *believed* when reported to us by credible persons who have witnessed it. This is the chief difference between faith and knowledge. 

As  existence  or  beings  must  precede  knowledge,  so  facts  must precede either knowledge or belief. An event must happen before it can be known by man — it must be known by some before it can be reported to others — it must be reported before it can be believed, and the testimony must be confirmed, or made credible, before it can be relied on. 

Something  must  be  done  before  it  can  be  known,  reported,  or believed. Hence, in the order of nature, there is first the fact, then the  testimony,  and  then  the  belief.  A  was  drowned  before  B reported it — B reported it before C believed it, and C believed it before he was grieved at it. This is the unchangeable and universal order of things as respects belief. In this example when we reason from effect to cause, it is *grief, belief, testimony, fact* — and from cause to effect, it is *fact, testimony, belief, grief.* We ascend from grief to belief — from belief to testimony — from testimony to fact. We descend from fact to testimony — from testimony to belief — and from  belief  to  grief.  To  this  there  is  no  exception,  more  than against the universality of the law of gravity. If, then, there was nothing said or done, there could be no testimony, and so no faith. Religious  affections  spring  from  faith;  and,  therefore,  it  is  of importance,  that  this  subject  should  be  disintricated  from  the mysticism of the schools. 

Laws call for obedience, and testimony for belief. Where there is no law, there can be no obedience; and when there is no testimony, there can be no faith. As obedience cannot transcend law, so faith cannot  transcend  testimony.  John's  testimony  went  to  so  many facts.  On  his  testimony  we  can  believe  only  as  far  as  he  has testified. And so of all the other witnesses. The certainty of faith depends upon the certainty or credibility of the witnesses. But not so  its  effects.  The  *effects*  depend  upon  the  facts  believed — the *certainty* upon the evidence. I may be equally certain that John was beheaded — that Jesus was crucified. Nay, I may be as certain of the birth of Jesus in Bethlehem, as I am of his death on Calvary. The testimony may be equally credible, and the faith equally strong; but the effects produced are not the same. The facts believed have not  the  same  meaning,  are  not  of  the  same  nature,  and  do  not produce the same feelings or effects. I may be as certain of the assassination  of  Cesar  in  the  Senate  House,  as  I  am  of  the crucifixion of Jesus on Calvary: but as the facts believed are as diverse in their nature, meaning, and bearings upon me, as the East and the West; so the effects or fruits of my faith are as different as Julius Cesar and Jesus Christ. 

The  more  ordinary  the  fact,  the  more  ordinary  the  testimony necessary to establish it. That A B, aged 90, and confined for some time with sickness, died last night, requires only the most ordinary testimony to render it credible. But that C D lived to 140, enjoying unabated vigor of mind and body, requires stronger testimony. But still,  all  facts  happening  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  and natural laws of things, require but good human testimony to make them worthy of credence. It is only extraordinary and supernatural facts  which  require  supernatural  testimony,  or  testimony supernaturally confirmed. This is the point to which we have been looking in this essay. And now that we have arrived at it, I would ask, *How has the testimony of the Apostles and Evangelists been confirmed?* 

To *confirm a testimony* is neither more nor less than to make it credible to those to whom it is tendered; or, to express the same idea in other words, it is to give men power to believe. Now, it will not  require  the  same  amount  of  evidence  to  persuade  an astronomer that the earth's shadow struck the moon last eclipse, as it  would  to  convince  an  Indian;  nor  would  it  require  the  same amount of evidence to convince a chemist that combustion was effected  by  pouring  water  on  a  certain  composition  of  mineral substances,  as  it  would  an  unlettered  swain.  To  make  any testimony credible to any order of beings, regard must therefore be had to the capacity, attainments, and habits of those beings. To confirm the testimony of the Apostles concerning the Messiah's death, resurrection, ascension into heaven, and coronation as the Lord and King of the Universe, imports no more nor no less than that it should be rendered every way credible to such things as we are,  or  that  we  should  be  made  able  to  believe.  A  testimony *confirmed,* and yet *incredible* to those to whom it is tendered, is a contradiction in terms. But why emphasize on the word *confirmed?* Because the holy Apostles have emphasized upon it. It is therefore necessary that we should pay a due regard to the confirmation of the testimony. The testimony is one thing, and the confirmation is another.  It  is  necessary,  in  all  important  occasions  in  human affairs, that the testimony which is received between man and man should  be  confirmed  by  some  sanction.  Hence  an  oath  for confirmation  of  testimony  is  an  end  of  all  strife.  The  highest confirmation  which  men  require  in  all  questions  of  facts,  is  a solemn oath or affirmation that the things affirmed are true. 

But supernatural facts require supernatural confirmations. Hence when the confirmation of the gospel is spoken of in the apostolic writings, it is resolved into the doings or works of the Holy Spirit. '*Demonstrations of the Holy Spirit,* are the confirmatory proofs of the  gospel.  When  Paul  delivered  the  testimony  of  God,  or  the testimony concerning Jesus, to the Corinthians, he says, '*It is was confirmed among them.*' And if we examine into the confirmation of the testimony as Paul explained it, we shall find that he makes the spiritual gifts, or those extraordinary and miraculous powers which the Apostles themselves displayed, and which so many of their converts also possessed, an assurance or confirmation of what he promulged. 

We shall only attend to the light which one of his epistles to the Corinthians throws upon this subject. After thanking his God for the favor bestowed upon the disciples  of Corinth  when he first visited them, he proceeds to specify the special favors bestowed upon the disciples in that renowned city. 'You were enriched (says he, chap. 1: ver. 5.) with every gift by him, even with *all speech* and *all knowledge* when the testimony of Christ was confirmed among  you:  so  that  you  come  behind  in  *no  gift.*'  'There  are diversities of gifts, (says he, chap. 12:) for to one disciple is given *the word of wisdom;* to another, *the word of knowledge;* to another, *faith,* (to be healed;) to another, *the gift of healing;* to another, *the ability  of  working  in  others  the  power  of  working  miracles;*  to another,  *prophecy;*  to  another,  *discerning  of  spirits;*  to  another, *divers kinds of foreign tongues;* and to another, *the interpretation of foreign tongues.*' — Now, the Corinthians were put in possession of these (for they came behind in no gift) 'when the testimony of Christ was confirmed among them.' For, says Paul, I came not to you with the excellency of speech, or the persuasive eloquence of the schools, but with the demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your belief of my testimony, or your faith, might not rest, or be founded upon human wisdom or eloquence, but upon the power of God evinced in the demonstrations of the Spirit which confirmed my  testimony  among  you.  For  had  it  not  been  for  these demonstrations of the Spirit and power, your faith could not have rested upon an immoveable basis. 

To those desirous to understand this subject, an examination of this first letter to the Corinthians cannot fail to be most instructive; for it  most  clearly  and  unequivocally  teaches  us  that  the  *visible, audible, sensible* demonstration of the Spirit and of power, was that supernatural attestation of the testimony of Christ which made it  credible,  so  that  no  man  could  have  acknowledged  Jesus  of Nazareth to be the Almighty Lord, but by this demonstration of the Holy Spirit.  Thus was  the testimony  confirmed — thus  was Jesus demonstrated to be the only begotten Son of God —  and thus, and thus only, are men enabled to believe in him.4 

5. Fundamental Fact

Amidst  the  uncertainty,  darkness,  and  vice,  that  overspread  the earth, the Messiah appears, and lays a foundation of hope, of true religion, and of religious union, unknown, unheard of, unexpected among  men.  The  Jews  were  united  by  consanguinity,  and  by agreement in a ponderous ritual. The Gentiles rallied under every opinion, and were grouped, like filings of steel around a magnet, under every possible shade of difference of thought, concerning their mythology. So long as unity of opinion was regarded as a proper  basis  of  religious  union,  so  long  have  mankind  been distracted by the multiplicity and variety of opinions. To establish what is called a system of orthodox opinions as the bond of union, was, in fact, offering a premium for new diversities in opinion, and for increasing,  *ad infinitum,*  opinions,  sects,  and divisions. And what is worse than all, it was establishing self-love and pride as religious  principles,  as  fundamental  to  salvation;  or  a  love regulated  by  similarity  of  opinion,  is  only  a  love  to  one's  own opinion; and all the zeal exhibited in the defence of it, is but the workings of the pride of opinion. 

When  the  Messiah  appeared  as  the  founder  of  a  new  religion, systems of religion consisting of opinions and speculations upon matter and mind, upon God and nature, upon virtue and vice, had been adopted, improved, reformed, and exploded time after time. That  there  was  always  something  superfluous,  something defective, something wrong, something that could be improved, in every system of religion and morality, was generally felt, and at last universally acknowledged. But  the  grandeur, sublimity, and beauty of the foundation of hope, and of ecclesiastical or social union,  established  by  the  author  and  founder  of  Christianity, consisted in this, that **the belief of one fact**, *and that upon the best evidence in the world, is all that is requisite, as far as faith goes, to salvation.  The*  *belief  of  this*  **one  fact**  *and  submission  to*  **one institution** *expressive of it, is all that is required of Heaven to admission  into  the  church.*  A  Christian,  as  defined,  not  by  Dr. Johnson, nor any creed-maker, but by one taught from Heaven, is one that believes this *one fact,* and has submitted to *one institution,* and whose deportment accords with the morality and virtue of the great  Prophet.  The  one  fact  is  expressed  in  a  single proposition — *that Jesus the Nazarene is the Messiah.* The evidence upon which it is to be believed is the testimony of *twelve men,* confirmed  by  prophecy,  miracles,  and  spiritual  gifts.  The  *one institution* is baptism into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Every such person is a disciple in the fullest sense of the word, the moment he has believed this one fact, upon the  above  evidence,  and  has  submitted  to  the  above  mentioned institution; and whether he believes the five points condemned, or the five points approved by the synod of Dort, is not so much as to be  asked  of  him;  whether  he  holds  any  of  the  views  of  the Calvinists or Arminians, Presbyterians, Episcopalians, Methodists, Baptists, or Quakers, is never once to be asked of such persons, in order  to  admission  into  the  Christian  community,  called  the church. The only doubt that can reasonably arise upon these points, is, whether this *one fact,* in its nature and necessary results, can suffice to the salvation of the soul, and whether the open avowal of it, in the overt act of baptism, can be a sufficient recommendation of  the  person,  so  professing,  to  the  confidence  and  love  of  the brotherhood. As to the first of these, it is again and again asserted, in the clearest language, by the Lord himself, the Apostles Peter, Paul, and John, that he that believes the testimony that Jesus is the Christ, is begotten by God, may overcome the world, has eternal life,  and  is,  on  the  veracity  of  God,  saved  from  his  sins.  This should settle the first point; for the witnesses agree that whosoever confesses  that  Jesus  is  the  Christ,  and  is  baptized,  should  be received into the church; and not an instance can be produced of any person being asked for any other faith, in order to admission, in  the whole New Testament. The Savior  expressly declared to Peter, that upon this fact, that he was the Messiah, the Son of God, he would *build his church;* and Paul has expressly declared that "other foundation can no man lay (for ecclesiastical union) than that  **Jesus  is  the  Christ**."  The  point  is  proved  that  we  have assumed; and this proved, every thing is established requisite to the union of all Christians upon a proper basis. 

It must strike  every  man of  reflection, that  a religion  requiring much mental abstraction or exquisite refinement of thought, or that calls  for  the  comprehension  or  even  apprehension  of  refined distinctions  and  of  nice  subtleties,  is  a  religion  not  suited  to mankind in their present circumstances. To present such a creed as the Westminster, as adopted, either by Baptists or Paido-Baptists; such  a  creed  as  the  Episcopalian,  or,  in  the  fact,  any  sectarian creed,  composed  as  they  all  are,  of  propositions,  deduced  by logical inferences, and couched in philosophical language, to all those who are fit subjects of the salvation of Heaven — I say, to present such a creed to such for their examination or adoption, shocks  all  common  sense.  This  pernicious  course  is  what  has paganized  Christianity.  Our  sects  and  parties,  our  disputes  and speculations, our orders and castes, so much resemble anything but Christianity,  that  when  we  enter  a  modern  synagogue,  or  an ecclesiastical  council,  we  seem  rather  to  have  entered  a  Jewish sanhedrim, a Mohometan mosque, a Pagan temple, or an Egyptian cloister,  than  a  Christian  congregation.  Sometimes,  indeed,  our religious meetings so resemble the Areopagus, the Forum, or the Senate, that we almost suppose ourselves to have been translated to Athens or Rome. Even Christian orators emulate Demosthenes and Cicero.  Christian  doctrines  are  made  to  assume  the  garb  of Egyptian mysteries, and Christian observances put on the pomp and pageantry of pagan ceremonies. Unity of opinion, expressed in subscription  to  voluminous  dogmas  imported  from  Geneva, Westminster, Edinburgh, or Rome, is made the bond of union: and a  difference  in  the  tenth,  or  ten  thousandth  shade  of  opinion, frequently  becomes  the  actual  cause  of  dismemberment  or expulsion. The New Testament was not designed to occupy the same  place  in  theological  seminaries  that  the  carcases  of malefactors  are  condemned  to  occupy  in  medical  halls — first doomed  to  the  gibbet,  and  then  to  the  dissecting  knife  of  the spiritual anatomist. Christianity  consists infinitely more in  good works than in sound opinions; and while it is a joyful truth, that he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, it is equally true that he that says, 'I know him, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him.'6  

6. Purity of Speech 

If  I  were  to  classify  in  *three*  chapters  the  whole  Christian institution, after the fashion of the modern schools, for the sake of being understood, I would designate them Christian *faith,* Christian *worship,* and Christian *morality.* To these the moderns have added two others, which, using the same licence,  I would  call human *philosophy,* and human *traditions.* Now, in the first chapter, we, and all Christians, are agreed: for as Christian faith has respect to *the matters of fact* recorded — to the direct testimony of God found in the New Testament concerning himself — concerning his Son and Spirit — concerning mankind — what he has done, and what he will do, on it there is no debate. I find all *confessions of* **faith**, properly so called, like the *four* gospels, tell the same story so far as matters of fact or faith are concerned. 

In  the  second  chapter  we  are  also  agreed,  that  God  is  to  be worshipped through the Mediator — in prayer, in praise, public and private — in the ordinances of Christian baptism, the Lord's day, the Lord's supper, and in the devotional study of his word and of his works of creation and providence. 

In the third chapter we all acknowledge the same moral code. What is  morality,  is  confessed  and  acknowledged  by  all;  but  in  the practice of it there are great subtractions. 

We repudiate the two remaining chapters as having any place in our  faith,  worship,  or  morality;  because  we  think  we  have discovered that all the divisions in Protestant Christendom — that all the partyism, vain jangling, and heresies which have disgraced the Christian profession, have emanated from human philosophy and human  tradition.  It  is  not  faith,  nor  piety,  nor  morality;  but philosophy  and  tradition  that  have  alienated  and  estranged Christians, and prevented the conversion of the world. Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, deserved not the reputation of philosophers, if Calvin, Arminius, and Wesley, were not worthy of it. The former philosophised morally on nature and ancient tradition — the latter, on the Bible, and human society. 

Religious philosophers on the Bible have excogitated the following doctrines and philosophical distinctions: —  

'The Holy Trinity,' 'Three persons of one substance, power, and eternity,' 'Co-essential, co-substantial, co-equal,' 'The Son eternally begotten of the Father,' 'An eternal Son,' 'Humanity and divinity of Christ,' 'The Holy Ghost eternally proceeding from the Father and the  Son,'  'God's  eternal  decrees,'  'Conditional  and  unconditional election and reprobation,' 'God out of Christ,' 'Free will,' 'Liberty and necessity,' 'Original sin,' 'Total depravity,' 'Covenant of grace,'7 'Effectual  calling,'  'Free  grace,'  'Sovereign  grace,'  'General  and particular atonement,' 'Satisfy divine justice,' 'Common and special operations of the Holy Ghost,' 'Imputed righteousness,' 'Inherent righteousness,'  'Progressive sanctification,' 'Justifying and saving faith,' 'Historic and temporary faith,' 'The direct and reflex acts of faith,' 'The faith of assurance, and the assurance of faith,' 'Legal repentance,' 'Evangelical repentance,' 'Perseverance of the saints,'8 and  'Falling  from  grace,'9  'Visible  and  invisible  church,'  'Infant membership,' 'Sacraments,' 'Eucharist,' 'Consubstantiation,' 'Church government,' 'The power of the keys,' etc. etc. 

Concerning these and all such doctrines, and all the speculations and  phraseology  to  which  they  have  given  rise,  we  have  the privilege neither to affirm nor deny — neither to believe nor doubt; because God has not proposed them to us in his word, and there is no  command  to  believe  them.  If  they  are  deduced  from  the Scriptures, we have them in the facts and declarations of God's Spirit; if they are not deduced from the Bible, we are free from all the difficulties and strifes which they have engendered and created. 

*We choose to speak of Bible things by Bible words,* because we are always suspicious that if the word is not in the Bible, the idea which  it  represents  is  not  there;  and  always  confident  that  the things taught by God are better taught in the words, and under the names which the Holy Spirit has chosen and appropriated, than in the words which man's wisdom teaches. 

There is nothing more essential to the union of the disciples of Christ  than  *purity*  of  speech.  So  long  as  the  earth  was  of  one speech, the human family was united. Had they been then of a pure speech  as  well  as  of  one  speech,  they  would  not  have  been separated. God, in his just indignation, dispersed them; and before he scattered them, *he divided their language.* One of his Prophets, who  lived  in  a  degenerate  age,  who  prophesied  against  the corruptions of his day, when he spoke of better times, of an age of union and communion, was commanded to say in the name of the Lord, 'Then will I turn to the people a *pure language,* that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, to serve him *with one consent.*'10 Purity of speech is here declared to be prerequisite to serving the Lord with one consent. 

'The words of the Lord are pure words.'11 To have a pure speech we  must  choose  the  language  of  Canaan,  and  abandon  that  of Ashdod. And if we would be of one mind, we must 'speak the same thing.' This was Paul's scheme of union, and no man can suggest a better. 

It requires but little reflection to discover that the fiercest disputes about religion, are about what the Bible does *not* say, rather than about what it *does* say — about words and phrases coined in the mint of  speculative  theology.  Of  these  the  *homousios*  and  the *homoousios*  of  the  ever-memorable  Council  of  Nice  are  a  fair sample. Men are neither wiser, more intelligent, nor better after, than  before,  they  know  the  meaning  of  these  words.  As  far  as known on earth, there is not, in 'the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,' the name of any person who was either converted or sanctified to God by any of these controversies about human dogmas, nor by anything learned from the canons or creeds of all the Councils, from that of Nice to the last Methodistic Conference. 

It is a virtue, then, to forget this scholastic jargon, and even the names of the dogmas which have convulsed Christendom. It is a concession due to the crisis in which we live, for the sake of peace, to adopt the vocabulary of Heaven, and to return the borrowed nomenclature of the schools of its rightful owners — to speculate no more upon the opinions  of Saint Austin, Saint  Tertullian, Saint Origen — to  speak  of  the  Father,  and  the  Son,  and  of  the  Holy Spirit — of  the  gospel,  of  faith,  of  repentance,  of  baptism,  of election, of the death of Christ, of his mediation, of his blood, of the reconciliation, of the Lord's supper, of the atonement, of the church of God, etc. etc. in all the phrases found in the Record, without partiality — to learn to love one another as much when we differ in opinion as when we agree, and to distinguish between the testimony of God, and man's reasonings and philosophy upon it.  

I need not say much upon the chapter of *human traditions.* They are easily distinguished from the *Apostles' traditions.* Those of the Apostles are found in their writings, as those of men are found in their  own  books.  Some  human  traditions  may  have  a  show  of wisdom, but only an appearance. So long as it is written, 'In vain to they  worship  me,  teaching  for  doctrines  the  commandments  of men,'  so  long  will  it  be  presumptuous  folly  to  add  the commandments of men to the precepts of Jesus Christ. I know of but one way in which all believers in Jesus Christ, honorably to themselves, honorably to the Lord, and advantageously to all the sons of Adam, can form one communion. All have two chapters too many in their present ecclesiastic constitutions. The contents of the aforesaid two chapters are various and different in all the sects, but they all have these two chapters under some name. In some they are long, and in some they are short; but whether long or short, let every one agree to tear them out of his book and burn them, and be satisfied with *faith, piety,* and *morality.* Let human philosophy  and  human  tradition,  as  any  part  of  the  Christian institution, be thrown overboard into the sea, and then the ship of the church will make a prosperous, safe, and happy voyage across the  ocean  of  time,  and  finally,  under  the  triumphant  flag  of Immanuel, gain a safe anchorage in the haven of eternal rest. 

I would appeal to every honorable, good, and loyal citizen of the kingdom of Heaven, — to every one that seeks the good of Zion, that loves the kingdom and the appearing of our common Lord and Savior, whether such a concession be not due to the Lord, to the saints in heaven and on earth, and to the whole human race in the crisis in which we are now placed; and whether we could propose less,  or  ought  to  demand  more,  than  to  make  one  whole  burnt offering of all our "empty and deceitful philosophy," — our "science, falsely so called," — and our traditions received from our fathers. I would  leave  it  to  the  good  sense  of  every  sane  mind  to  say, whether  such  a  whole  burnt  offering  would  not  be  the  most acceptable  peace  offering,  which,  in  this  our  day,  could  be presented on the altar of the Prince of Peace; and whether, under the  teachings  of  the  Apostles  of  the  Great  Prophet,  the  church might not again triumphantly stand upon the holy ground, which she so honorably occupied before Origen, Austin, Athanasius, or the first Pope was born!12

1 Christian Baptist, vol. 2, pp. 66, 67. Essays on the Westminster creed, vol. 2. Review of Dr. Noel's Circular, vol. 5.  

2 Pollock's Course of Time, Book 8: p. 189.  

3 Millennial Harbinger —  Extra, No. 6, pp. 340-345.  

4 Millennial Harbinger, vol. 1, pp. 8-12.  

5 The fundamental proposition is — *that Jesus is the Christ.* The *fact,* however, contained in this proposition is — that God has anointed Jesus of Nazareth as the only Savior of sinners. He is the promised Christ: ' God has constituted him Lord and Christ.' —  PETER.  

6 Christian Baptist, vol. 1, pp. 167-169.  

7, 8, 9 These are examples of scriptural phrases misapplied: for the corruption of Christianity has been consummated by the incursions of barbarian language, and by the new appropriations of the sacred style.  

10 Zep 3:9.  

11 Psalm 12:6.  

12 Millennial Harbinger, vol. 6, pp. 109-113.  

