Part V: Regeneration. 

1. Regeneration 
- I create New Heavens and a New 

`  `Isa 65:18. Earth." 

- Behold, I make all things new."   Rev. 21:5. 

` `We  intend  an  essay  of  "the  seeds  of  things."  The  topic  is  a common one, a familiar one, and yet an interesting one. Much has been said, much has been written upon it; and yet it is no better understood than it ought to be. Few give themselves the trouble of thinking much on the things which they think they understand; and many would rather follow the thoughts of others, than think for themselves. Suspense is painful, much study is a weariness of the flesh; and, therefore, the majority are content with the views and opinions handed to them from those who have gone before. 

We  wish  to  treat  this  subject  as  if  it  were  a  new  one;  and  to examine it now, as if we had never examined it before. It is worthy of it. Generation is full of wonders, for it is full of God's physical grandeur;  yet  regeneration  is  still  more  admirable,  for  in  it  the moral attributes of Jehovah are displayed. But  we aim not  at a development of its wonders, but at a plain common sense scriptural exposition of its import. 

We  have  not  learned  our  theology  from  Athanasius,  nor  our morality from Seneca; and, therefore, we shall not call upon them for  illustration,  argument,  or  proof.  To  the  Sacred  Records,  in which alone Christianity yet remains in all its freshness, we look for light; and thither would we direct the eyes of the readers. It is not the regeneration of the schools in which Christianity has been lowered, misapprehended, obscured, and adulterated, of which we are to write; but that regeneration of which Jesus spoke, and the Apostles wrote. 

A  few  things  must  be  premised — a  few  general  views expressed — before we, or our readers, are prepared for the more minute details: and to approach the subject with all unceremonious despatch, we observe, that —  

Man unregenerate is ruined in body, soul, and spirit; a frail and mortal  creature.  From  Adam  his  father  he  inherits  a  shattered constitution. He is the child of a fallen progenitor; a scion from a degenerate stock. 

Superior to Adam, the exile from Eden, in physical, intellectual, and moral nature, none of his descendants can rise. It is not in nature to improve itself; for above its fountain the stream cannot rise.  Cain,  the  first  born  of  Eve,  was  in  nature  the  image  and likeness of him that begat him. Education failed to improve him, while Abel, his  younger brother, obtained the excellency which faith in God's promise alone bestows. The first born, it will be conceded, was at least equal to his younger brother: and who can plead that in nature he excels Eve's eldest son! 

Man  in  his  ruins  is,  however,  a  proper  subject  of  a  remedial system. He is susceptible of renovation. Therefore God has placed him under a regenerating economy. This economy contemplates the regeneration of the whole human constitution, and proposes as its consummation the transformation of spirit, soul, and body. The destiny of the regenerate is described by Paul in one sentence: "As we now bear the image of the earthly Adam, we shall then bear the image of the heavenly Adam." 

God's  own  Son  is  proposed  as  a  model.  Conformity  to  him  in glory, honor, and immortality, as the perfection of the regenerate, is the predestination of him who speaks of things that are not, as though they were. 

Regeneration is, therefore, moral and physical: or, in other words, there is now a renovation of the mind — of the understanding, will, and  affections; — and  there  will  hereafter  be  a  renovation  of  the body: "For this corruptible body shall put on incorruption, and this mortal body shall put on immortality." 

The renovation of the mind and character is, therefore, that moral regeneration  which  is  to  be  effected  in  this  life;  for  which  the remedial system, or kingdom of heaven, was set up on earth; and this, therefore, first of all, demands our attention. 

Before we attempt an answer in detail to the question, *How is this moral regeneration effected?* we shall attend to the principle on which the whole remedial system proceeds. The grand principle, or means  which  God  has  adopted  for  the  accomplishment  of  this moral regeneration, is the full demonstration and proof of a single proposition  addressed  to  the  reason  of  man.  This  sublime proposition is, **that** **God is love**. 

The reason and  wisdom of this  procedure will  suggest  itself to every  one,  who  can  understand  the  views  and  feelings  of  all unregenerated  man.  Man  in  a  state  of  alienation  and  rebellion, naturally suspects, that if he be a sinner, and if God hate sin, he must hate him. As love begets love; so hatred begets hatred; and if a sinner suspects that God hates him, he cannot love God. He must know that God loves him, before he can begin to love God. "We," says  an  Apostle,  "love  God  because  he  first  loved  us." — While alienated  in  heart,  through  the  native  darkness  of  his understanding, the sinner misinterprets every restraint which God has placed in his way to prevent his total ruin, as indications of the wrath  of  Heaven.  His  transgression  of  these  restraints,  and  his consciousness of having defied the veracity and power of God, only increase his enmity, and urge him onward to his apostasy and wanderings  from  his  Creator.  The  goodness  of  God  being misunderstood, furnishes to  him  no incentive to repentance and reformation. Guilt, and fear, and shame, the fruits of his apostasy, becloud  his  understanding,  and  veil  from  his  eyes  all  the demonstrations  of  benevolence  and  goodness,  with  which  the creation abounds. Adam under a tree, hiding from God, trembling with fear, suspicious of the movements of every leaf, and covered with shame as a garment, is both an illustration and proof of these views of the state of mind, which obtains in the unregenerate. 

Neither the volume of creation, nor that of God's providence, is sufficient to remove from the natural man these misconceptions and the consequent alienation of heart. The best proof that these two volumes cannot do this, is, that they never have, in any one instance, yet done it. From the nature of things it is indeed evident that they cannot do it. The elements are too often at war with the happiness of man. The ever changing attitude of the natural world in  reference  to  health,  and  life,  and  comfort,  render  it  at  best doubtful, whether the laws of nature, which ultimately bring man down to the grave, are the effect of benevolence, or of malevolence towards mankind. A third volume explanatory of both, and replete also  with  supernatural  developments,  is  wanting,  to  furnish  the most diligent student of nature and providence, with the means of learning the true and full character of him, against whom we have rebelled. 

That volume is the Bible. Holy Prophets and Apostles spake as they were moved by the Spirit of Knowledge and Revelation. Its records,  its  history,  it  prophecy,  its  precepts,  its  laws,  its ordinances, and its examples, all develop and reveal God to man, and man to himself. 

But it is in the person and mission of the **Incarnate** **Word**, that we learn that *God is love.* That God gave his Son for us, and yet gives his Spirit to us — and this gives us himself — are the mysterious and transcendent proofs of the most august proposition in the universe. The gospel, Heaven's  wisdom and power combined, God's own expedient for the renovation of human nature, is neither more nor less, than the illustration and proof of this regenerating proposition. 

Thus  we  hasten  to  our  subject.  Having  glanced  at  the  great landmarks of the plantations of nature and grace, now that we may, in the light of truth, ascertain the true and heaven-taught doctrine of regeneration, we shall cautiously survey the whole process, as developed by the commissioned teachers of the deep counsels of the only true God. 

The  certain  things,  parts  of  this  great  progress,  may  be  well understood, certain terms, which are wont to use to represent them, must be well defined, and accurately apprehended. These terms are *Fact,  Testimony,  Faith,  Repentance,  Reformation,  Bath  of Regeneration, New Birth, Renewing of the Holy Spirit, Newness of Life.*1 

"All things are of God" in the regeneration of man, is our motto; because our Apostle affirmed this as a cardinal truth. He is the author of the *facts* and of the *testimony* which declares them; and being  the  author  of  these,  he  is  the  author  of  all  the  effects produced by these facts. The Christian is a new *creation,* of which God is the *Creator.* The change of heart and of character, which constitute moral regeneration, is the legitimate impression of the facts, or things which God has wrought. The facts constitute the moral  seal  which  stamps  the  image  of  God  upon  man.  In  the natural order, we must place them first, and, therefore, we must first define the term.  

***Repentance*** 

Repentance is usually defined "*sorrow for anything that is past;*" and in the religious vocabulary it is simply "*sorrow for sin.*" This is one, but it is only one of the natural effects of the belief of the testimony  of  God.  The  gospel  facts,  testimony,  and  faith, contemplate more than this. But yet it is necessary that this point of faith should be distinctly apprehended, especially in this age, when it occupies so large a space in the systems of theology. 

Repentance,  in  our  current  acceptation,  is  sorrow  for  sin;  and certainly there is no man who believes the revealed facts found in the  testimony  of  God,  who  will  not  be  sorry  for  his  sins.  But simple sorrow for the past, is but a feeling of the heart; which, unless it excite to reformation or the abandonment of sin, is of no more use than the regrets of Judas after he had sold his Master for fifteen dollars. Repentance must, however, precede reformation; for unless we are sorry for the past, and grieved with ourselves, we will  not  think  of  a  change  of  conduct.  Repentance  is  to reformation,  what  motive  is  to  action,  or  resolution  to  any undertaking. It was well for David to resolve to build the temple; and  so  it  is  well  to  form  any  good  design;  but  much  better  to execute  it.  To  feel  sorry  for  the  poor  and  the  afflicted,  and  to resolve to assist and comfort them, is well; but to go and do it is better:  and,  indeed  unless  our  sorrow  for  the  past,  terminate  in reformation for the future, it is useless in the estimation of heaven and earth; as useless as to say to the hungry, Be filled; or to the naked, Be clothed. 

Genuine repentance does not always issue in reformation. Judas was sorrowful even to  death, but could not reform. Many have been so genuinely sorry for their sins, as to become suicides. Speak we  of  "a  godly  sorrow?"  No:  this  is  not  to  be  expected  from unconverted and ungodly persons. Christians, Paul teaches, when they err, may repent with a godly sorrow; but this is not to be expected  from  the  unregenerate,  or  from  those  who  have  not reformed. It is not, then, the genuineness of repentance that is to be appreciated,  unless  by  genuine  repentance  is  meant  more  than simple sorrow for the past — unless by genuine repentance is meant reformation.  Yet  without  sincere  or  unfeigned  repentance,  there cannot be real or genuine reformation. 

This leads us to observe, that the only unequivocal evidence of sincere repentance, is the actual redress of the injury done; not only a cessation  from  the sin,  but  a restitution  for the sin,  as far as restitution  can  possibly  be  made.  *No  restitution,  no repentance — provided  restitution  can  be  made.*  And  I  may  be permitted  to  add,  *that without  repentance  and  restitution,  when possible, there can be no remission.* 

The  preachers  of  repentance — of  the  necessity  of  repentance  in order to remission, ought to set this matter fairly and fully before sinners. Do they represent repentance as sorrow for the past, and a determination to reform? How then will the sinner know that he is sorry for his sins against men, or how will the community know that he has repented of such sins, unless full restitution was made? It is impossible that either the sinner himself, or the community who know his sins against man, can have any certain evidence that he is penitent, unless by making all possible restitution. 

Peccator wounded the reputation of his neighbor Hermas, and on another  occasion  defrauded  him  of  ten  pounds. — Some  of  the neighborhood were apprised that he had done both. Peccator was converted under the preaching of Paulinus, and, on giving in  a relation  of  his  sorrow  for  his  sins,  spoke  of  the  depth  of  his convictions, and of his abhorrence of his transgression. He was received into the congregation, and sat down with the faithful to commemorate  the  great  sin  offering.  Hermas  and  his  neighbors were witnesses of all this. They saw that Peccator was penitent, and much reformed in his behavior; but they could not believe him sincere, because he had made no restitution. They regarded him either as a hypocrite or self-deceived; because, having it in  his power, he repaid  not  the ten pounds,  nor once contradicted the slanders  he  had  propagated.  Peccator,  however,  felt  little enjoyment in his profession, and soon fell back into his former habits. He became again penitent, and on examining the grounds of his falling off, discovered that he had never cordially turned away from his sins. Overwhelmed in sorrow for the past, he resolved on giving himself up to the Lord; and, reflecting on his past life, set about the work of reformation in earnest. He called on Hermas, paid him his ten pounds, and the interest for every day he had kept it back, went to all the persons to whom he had slandered him, told them what injustice he had done him, and begged them, if they had told it to any other persons, to contradict it. Several other persons whom he had wronged in his dealings with them, he also visited; and fully redressed all these wrongs against his neighbors. He also confessed  them  to  the  Lord,  and  asked  him  to  forgive  him. Peccator  was  then  restored  to  the  church;  and  better  still,  he enjoyed a peace of mind, and a confidence in God, which was a continual feast. His example, moreover, did more to enlarge the congregation at the Cross-roads, than did the preaching of Paulinus in a whole year. This was, unequivocally, *sincere* repentance. 

This is the repentance which Moses preached, and which Jesus approbated.  Under  the  law,  confession  to  the  priest,  and  the presenting of a trespass offering, availed nothing to forgiveness without restitution. But the law went into details still more minute than these; for provision is made for the case in which the sinner could not find the person against whom he had sinned. In such a case, the penitent sinner was to seek out the kindred of the injured party, and if he could find any kinsman, he was to recompense this kinsman; but if he could not find a kinsman, he must recompense it to the Lord, besides offering his trespass offering. It was to go into the Lord's treasury.2 The principle uniformly, in all cases of sin 

against man, was, the sinner "shall make amends for the harm he has done, and shall add the fifth part thereto."3 

If  any  one  suppose  that  repentance  is  to  be  less  sincere  or unequivocal  under  the  gospel,  let  him  remember  that  Zaccheus proposed more than adding a fifth; he would restore fourfold, and that Jesus approbated him for so doing. Indeed, John the Immerser demanded fruits worthy of repentance or of reformation, and Paul proclaimed that those who turned to God should do works meet for, or worthy of, repentance.4 

"Works,  worthy  of  repentance,"  is  a  phrase  which  can  be understood in no other sense than those works which make amends for the harm done to men and the dishonor done to God, as far as both are possible. Can any man think that he is sorry for that sin or wrong  which  he  has  done,  when  he  makes  no  effort  to  make amends to him who was injured in person, character, or property, by it? Works worthy of his professed repentance are wanting, so long as any being whom he has injured in person, property, or reputation, is unredressed to the utmost extent of his ability. 

One  of  our  most  popular  commentators  says — and  with  much truth — "No  man  should  expect  mercy  at  the  hand  of  God,  who having wronged his neighbor, refuses, when he has it in his power, to  make  *restitution.*  Were  he  to  weep  tears  of  blood,  both  the justice and mercy of God would shut out his prayer, if he make not his  neighbor  amends  for  the  injury  he  has  done  him.  He  is  a dishonest man, who illegally holds the property of another in his hands."5 

Every preacher of repentance should insist upon these evidences of sincerity both for the satisfaction of the penitent himself, and for the  good  of  the  community.  "Many  that  believed  came  and confessed, and showed their deeds; many of them also, who used curious arts, bringing their books together, burnt them before all; and they computed the value of them and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver."6 This was making restitution, in their case, as far as possible; and the principle here evinced is applicable in every other case. 

But  in  pursuing  this  subject  so  far,  we  have  passed  over  the boundaries  of  repentance,  and  sometimes  confounded  it  with reformation. This is owing to the licentious use of language, to which  modern  theology  has  so  richly  contributed.  We  shall, however,  redress  this  wrong,  as  far  as  practicable,  by  a  few remarks on 

***Reformation*** 

The word *metanoia,* used by the sacred writers and heaven-taught preachers of the New Economy, as indicative of the first effect of faith, as has been often showed, is different from that which our word *repentance* fitly represents. It literally imports *a change of mind;* but, as Parkhurst, Campbell, and many others say, "such a change of mind as influences one's subsequent behavior for the better." "It has been observed by some, and, I think with reason, that the former (*matanoeo*) denotes properly a change to the better: the latter (*matamelomai*) barely a change, whether to the better or to  the  worse;  that  the  former  marks  a  change  of  mind  that  is durable, and produces consequences; the latter expresses only a present  uneasy  feeling  of  regret,  without  regard  to  duration  or effects:  in  fine,  that  the  first  may  be  translated  into  English,  *I reform;*  the  second,  *I  repent,*  in  the  familiar  acceptation  of  the words." Now as every one who reforms *repents;* but as every one who  repents  does  *not  reform,*  this  distinction  is  necessary  and proper; and there is nothing hazarded, nothing lost by translating the former *I reform,* and the latter *I repent.* There is something gained, especially in  all places  where we have the word in  the imperative  mood,  because  then  it  is  of  importance  to  know precisely what is intended. If we are commanded only to change our mind, or to be sorry for the past, we have obeyed when we feel regret; but if more than mere change of mind or regret is intended, we have not obeyed the commandment until we change for the better. Now it is, we think, very evident from various passages of the sacred writings of the Apostles, and from their speeches, that they commanded more than a simple change of mind as respected past conduct, or mere sorrow for the past. Peter commanded the thousands assembled on the day of Pentecost, who had changed their  minds,  and  who were  sorry  for  the  past,  to  do  something which they had not yet done; and that something is in the common version rendered *repent;* and in the new version, *reform;* and in the old English Bible, *amend your lives.* The word here used is the imperative of *metanoeo.* Judas repented, and many like him, who never  reformed;  and,  therefore,  it  is  of  importance  that  this distinction should be kept in view."7 

Repentance is not reformation, but it is necessary to it; for whoever reforms must first repent. Reformation is, indeed, the carrying out of the purpose into our conduct. But as reformation belongs rather to  another  part  of  our  essay  than  the  present,  we  shall,  on  the premises already before us, pause and offer a few reflections. 

In the preceding definition of words and ideas, it would appear that we  have  a  literal  and  unfigurative  representation  of  the  whole process of what is figuratively called *regeneration.* For, as we shall soon see, the term *regeneration* is a figure of speech which very appropriately, though analogically, represents the reformation or renovation of life of which we have now spoken. 

That the preceding arrangement is not arbitrary, but natural and necessary, the reader will perceive, when he reflects, that the thing done, or the fact, must precede the report or testimony concerning it; that the testimony concerning it must precede the belief of it; that  belief  of  the  testimony  must  precede  any  feeling  in correspondence  with  the  fact  testified;  and  that  feeling  must precede action in conformity to it. Fact, testimony, faith, feeling, action,  are  therefore  bound  together  by  a  natural  and  gracious necessity, which no ingenuity  can separate.  And will not  every Christian say, that when a person *feels* and *acts* according to the faith,  or  the  testimony  of  God,  he  is  a  new creature — regenerate — truly converted to God? He that believes the facts  testified  in  the  record  of  God,  understands  them,  feels according to their nature and meaning, and acts in correspondence with  them — has  undergone  a  change  of  heart  and  of  life  which makes him a new man. 

This is that moral change of heart and life, which is figuratively called  *regeneration.*  We are not  to  suppose that  regeneration is something which must be added to the faith, the feeling, and the action or behavior, which are the effects of the testimony of God understood and embraced; or which are the impress of the divine facts attested by Prophets and Apostles. It is only another name for the same process in all its parts. 

It may also be observed that numerous figures and analogies are used by the inspired writers to set forth this change, as well as other leading truths and lessons in the Bible. In their collective capacity, Christians are called a kingdom, a nation, a generation, a family, a house, a flock, a city, a temple, a priesthood, etc. In their individual capacity they are called kings, priests, soldiers, citizens, children, sheep, branches, stones, etc. They are said to be begotten, born, regenerated, builded, engrafted, converted, created, planted. Now,  under  whatever  figure  they  are  considered  or  introduced, reason argues that everything said of them should be expressed in conformity with the figure under which they are presented. Are they  called  *sheep?* — then  he  that  presides  over  them  is  called  a *Shepherd;* their enemies are *wolves* and *dogs;* their sustenance is the *green pasture;* their place of safety and repose, the *sheepfold;* their  errors  are  *wanderings*  and  *strayings;*  their  conversion,  a *return;*  and  their  good  behavior  a  *hearing  of  the  voice,*  or  a *following,*  of  the  Shepherd.  Are  they  called  *children?* — then collectively they are a *family;* they are *begotten* and *born again;* God is their *Father;* their separation is an *adoption;* Jesus is their *elder brother;* they are *heirs* of God; they *live* and *walk* with God. Are  they  *priests?* — Jesus  is  their  *High  Priest;*  the  church  their *temple;*  the  Savior  is  their  *altar;*  their  songs,  their  praises,  are *incense* ascending to heaven; and their oblations to the poor, their works of love, are  *sacrifices* most acceptable to  God. Are they called  *citizens?* — the  church  is  then  *the  kingdom  of  heaven; Jerusalem is the mother of them all;* formerly they were *aliens,* and 

their  naturalization  is  *regeneration.*  Are  they  called *branches?* — then Jesus is the *true vine;* his Father the *vine dresser;* their union with Christ, an *engrafting;* the discipline of the gospel, a *pruning;* and their good works are *fruits of righteousness.* 

Thus  there  is  no  confusion  of  metaphor  in  the  Scriptures  of truth — in the dialect of heaven.  It is the language of Ashdod; it belongs  to  the  confusion  of  Babel,  to  mingle  and  confound  all figures and analogies. Hence are so often hear of *being born again,* without any allusion to a family or a kingdom! and of *regeneration* as antecedent to faith or repentance! Had a modern assembly of Divines been employed to accommodate the scripture style to their orthodox sentiments, we should not have had to read all the Old Testament and all the historic books of the New, to find the subject of regeneration but once proposed to an alien, as the fact is; but then we should have found it in the history of Abel, of Enoch, of Noah, and of Abraham, if not in every section of the law of Moses, in the Prophets, and in the Psalms. John the Baptist, Jesus, and the Holy Twelve, would have had it in every sermon; and truth faith would have been always defined as the fruit of regeneration. 

But Jesus had a *kingdom* in his eye and in his discourse before he ever mentioned being 'born again' to Nicodemus; for unless there was a family, a state, or a kingdom to be born into, it is impossible for any one to be born into it. And if the kingdom of heaven only began to be after Jesus entered into heaven; or, if it is was only approaching from the ministry of John to the day of Pentecost, then it would have been preposterous indeed — an incongruity of which no inspired man was every guilty — to call any change of heart or life, *a regeneration,* or *a new birth.* It is true that good men in all ages were made such by facts, testimony, faith, and feeling, by a change of heart, by the Spirit of God; but the *analogy* or *figure* of being *born,* or of being *regenerated,* only began to be preached, and when men began to press into it. 

We are now, perhaps, better prepared to consider the proper import and  meaning  of  '*regeneration*'  in  general,  and  of  '*the  bath  of regeneration*' in particular. 

***Regeneration*** 

This word is found but twice in all the oracles of God — once in Matt.  19:28.  and  once  in  Titus  3:5.  In  the  former  it  is  almost universally  understood  to  mean  *a  new  state  of  things,*  not  of *persons* — a peculiar era, in which all things are made new: — such as the formation  of  a new  church on the day of  Pentecost,  or the commencement of the Millennium, or the general resurrection. The biblical critics of eminence have assigned it to one or other of these great changes in the state of things. So we use the word *revolution,* and the phrase *the Revolution,* to express a change in the political state of things. The most approved punctuation and version of this passage renders it altogether evident that a new era is alluded to. 'Jesus answered, Indeed, I say to you, that at the renovation when the Son of Man shall be seated on his glorious throne, you, my followers, sitting also upon twelve thrones, shall judge the twelve tribes of Israel.' This being so evident, and so often alluded to in our former writings, we shall proceed to the remaining occurrence, Titus 3:5. 

All the new light which we propose to throw on this passage will be gathered from an examination of the acceptation of the word *generation* in the sacred writings. Our reason for this is, that we object to a peremptory decision of the meaning of a word which occurs only in the passage under discussion, from our reasonings upon the isolated passages in which it is found. In such a case, if we cannot find the whole word in any parallel passages, the proper substitute is the root or branches of that word, so far as they are employed  by  the  same  writers.  Moreover,  we  think  it  will  be granted, that, whatever may be the scriptural  acceptation of the word *generation,* regeneration is only the repetition of that act or process. 

After  a  close  examination  of  the  passages  in  which  *generation* occurs in the writings of the Hebrew Prophets and Apostles, we find it used only in two acceptations — as descriptive of the whole process of creation and of the thing created. A race of man, or a particular  class  of  men,  is  called  a  *generation;*  but  this  is  its figurative, rather than its literal meaning. Its literal meaning is the formation or creation of anything. Thus it is first used in the Holy Scriptures. Moses calls the creation, or whole process of formation of the heavens and the earth, 'The *generations* of the heavens and the earth.'8 The account of the formation of Adam and Eve, and 

also the account of the creations of Adam and Eve, are, by the same  writer,  called  'The  book  or  record  of  the  *generations*  of Adam.'9  This  is  the  literal  import  of  the  word;  consequently, *regeneration* literally indicates the whole process of renovating or new-creating man. 

This process may consist of numerous distinct acts; but it is in accordance  with  the  general  usage  to  give  to  the  beginning,  or consummating act, the name of the whole process. For the most part,  however,  the  name  of  the  whole  process  is  given  to  the consummating  act,  because  the  process  is  always  supposed incomplete until that act is performed. For example: In the process of tanning, fulling, forging, etc. the subject of these operations is not  supposed  to  be  tanned,  fulled,  forged,  until  the  last  act  is performed.  So  in  all  the  processes  of  nature — in  the  animal, vegetable,  and  mineral  kingdoms,  the  last  act  consummates  the process.  To  all  acquainted  with  the  process  of  animalization, germination,  crystallization,  etc.  no  farther  argument  is  needed. But in the style of our American husbandmen, no crop nor animal is *made,* until it come to maturity. We often hear them say of a good shower, or a few clear days, "This is the *making* of the wheat or  corn."  In  the  same  sense  it  is,  that  most  Christians  call *regeneration* **the new birth**; though *being born* is only the last act in natural generation, and the last act in regeneration. 

In  this  way  the  *new  birth*  and  *regeneration*  are  used indiscriminately by commentators and writers on theology, and by a figure of speech, it is justified on well established principles of rhetoric. This leads us to speak particularly of (the next chapter) 

2. The Bath of Regeneration 

By '*the bath of regeneration*' is not meant the first, second, or third act; but the last act of regeneration, which completes the whole; and is, therefore, used to denote the new birth. This is the reason why our Lord and his Apostles unite this act with water. Being *born of water,* in the Savior's style, and *the bath of regeneration,* in the Apostles' style, in the judgement of all writers and critics of eminence, refer to one and the same act — viz: christian baptism. Hence it came to pass, that *all the ancients* (as fully proved in our first  Extra  on  Remission)  used  the  word  *regeneration*  as synonymous  in  signification  with  *immersion.*  In  addition  to  the numerous quotations made in our Essay on Remission, from the creeds and liturgies of Protestant churches, we shall add another from  the  Common  Prayer  of  the  Church  of  England,  showing unequivocally  that  the  learned  Doctors  of  that  church  used  the words *regeneration* and *baptism* as synonymous. In the address and prayer of the minister after the baptism  of the child, he is commanded to say, —   

"Seeing now, dearly beloved brethren, that this child is regenerate, and grafted into the body of Christ's church, let us give thanks unto Almighty God for these benefits, and with one accord make our prayer  unto  him  that  this  child  may  lead  the  rest  of  his  life according to this beginning." 

"Then shall be said, all kneeling — " 

"We yield thee hearty thanks, most merciful Father, that it hath pleased  thee  to  regenerate  this  infant  with  thy  Holy  Spirit,  to receive him for thine own child by adoption, and to incorporate him into thy holy church. And humbly we beseech thee to grant that he, being dead unto sin, and living unto righteousness, and being buried with Christ in his death, may crucify the old man, and utterly  abolish  the  whole  body  of  sin;  and  that  as  he  is  made partaker of the death of thy Son, he may also be partaker of his resurrection; so that finally, with the residue of the holy church, he may be an inheritor of thine everlasting kingdom, through Christ our Lord. Amen!" 

Eusebius,  in  his  life  of  Constantine,  page  628,  shows  that  St. Cyprian, St. Athanasius, and, indeed, all the Greek Fathers, did regard baptism as the consummating act; and therefore they call it *teliosis,* the consummation. These authorities weigh nothing with us; but, as they weigh with our opponents, we think it expedient to remind them on which side the Fathers depose in the case before us. By these quotations we would prove no more than that the ancients *understood* the washing of regeneration, and indeed used the term *regeneration,* as synonymous with baptism. 

But were we asked for the precise import of the phrase, 'washing or bath  of  regeneration,'  either  on  philological  principles,  or  as explained by the Apostles, we would give it as our judgment, that the  phrase  is  a  circumlocution  or  periphrasis  for  water.  It  is *loutron,*  a  word  which  more  properly  signifies  the  vessel  that contains the water, than the water itself; and is, therefore, by the most learned critics and translators, rendered *bath,* as indicative either of the vessel containing the fluid or of the use made of the fluid in the vessel. It is, therefore, by a metonymy, the water of baptism,  or  the  water  in  which  we  are  regenerated.  Paul  was Hebrew, and spoke in the Hebrew style. We must learn that style before we fully understand the Apostle's style. In other words, we must studiously read the Old Testament before we can accurately understand the New. What more natural for a Jew accustomed to speak of 'the water of purification,' of 'the water of separation,'10 to speak  of  'the  bath  of  regeneration?'  If  the  phrase  'water  of purification'  meant  water  used  for  the  purpose  of  purifying  a person — if 'the water of separation' meant water used for separating a person, what more natural than that 'the bath of regeneration' should mean water used for regenerating a person? 

But  the  New  Testament  itself  confirms  this  exposition  of  the phrase. We find the word *loutron* once more used by the same Apostle, in  the same connection of thought.  In his  letter to  the Ephesians, he affirms that Jesus has sanctified (separated, purified with the water of purification,) the church by a *loutron* of water — 'a 

bath  of  water,  with  the  word' — 'having  cleansed  it  by  a  bath  of water,  with  the  word.'11  This  is  still  more  decisive.  The  king's 

translators, so fully aware that the sense of this passage agrees with Titus  3:5.  have,  in  both  places,  used  the  word  *washing,*  and Macknight the term *bath* as the import of *loutron.* What is called the *washing* or *bath of regeneration,* in the one passage, is, in the other, called 'the washing' or 'bath of water.' What is called '*saved*' in one, is called '*cleansed*' in the other; and what is called '*the renewal of the Holy Spirit*' in the one, is called '*the word*' in the other; because the Holy Spirit consecrates or cleanses through the word. For thus prayed the Messiah, 'Consecrate them through the truth: thy word is the truth.' And again, 'You are clean through the word that I have spoken unto you.' 

To the same effect, Paul, to the Hebrew Christians, says 'Having your hearts sprinkled from a guilty conscience, and your bodies washed with pure water' — the water of purification, the water of regeneration: for the phrase 'pure water' must be understood not of the  quality  of  the  water,  but  metonymically  of  the  effect,  the cleansing, the washing, or the purifying of the person — 'having your bodies, or persons *washed* with pure water,' or water that purifies or cleanses. 

No one, acquainted with Peter's style, will think it strange that Paul represents  persons  as  *saved,  cleansed,*  or  *sanctified*  by  water; seeing  Peter  unequivocally  asserts  that  '*we  are  saved*'  through water, or through baptism, as was Noah and his family through water and faith in God's promise. 'The antitype immersion does also now save us.' 

Finally, our great Prophet, the Messiah, gives to water the same place and power in the work of regeneration. For when speaking of being *born again* — when explaining to Nicodemus *the new birth,* he says, 'Except a man be *born of water* and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God." May not we, then, supported by such high authorities, call that water of which a person is born again, the water or bath of regeneration? 

***New Birth*** 

We have already seen that the consummation of the process of generation or creation is in the birth of the creature formed. So it is in the moral generation, or in the great process of regeneration. There is a state of existence from which he that is born passes; and there is a state of existence into which he enters after birth. This is true  of  the  whole  animal  creation,  whether  oviparous  and viviparous. Now the manner of existence, or the mode of life, is wholly changed; and he is, in reference to the former state, dead and to the new state alive. So in moral regeneration. The subject of this great change before his new birth, existed in one state; but after it, he exists in another. He stands in a new relation to God, angels, and men. He is now born of God, and has the privilege of being  a  son  of  God,  and  is  consequently  pardoned,  justified, sanctified, adopted, saved. The state which he left was a state of condemnation, what some call "the state of nature." The state into which  he  enters  is  a  state  of  favor,  in  which  he  enjoys  all  the heavenly  blessings  through  Christ:  therefore,  it  is  called  'the kingdom of heaven.' All this is signified in his death, burial, and resurrection with Christ; or in his being born of water. Hence, the necessity of being buried with Christ in water, that he may be born of water, that he may enjoy the renewal of the Holy Spirit, and be placed under the reign of favor. 

*All  the  means  of  salvation  are  means  of  enjoyment,  not  of procurement.* Birth itself is not for procuring, but for enjoying the life  possessed  before  birth.  So  in  the  analogy — no  one  is  to  be baptized, or to be buried with Christ; no one is to be put under the water of regeneration for the purpose of *procuring* life, but for the purpose of *enjoying* the life of which he is possessed. If the child is never  born,  all  its  sensitive  powers  and  faculties  cannot  be enjoyed; for it is after birth that these are fully developed, and feasted upon all the aliments and objects of sense in nature. Hence all that is *now* promised in the gospel, can only be *enjoyed* by those who are born again and placed in the kingdom of heaven under all its influences. Hence the philosophy of that necessity which Jesus preached — 'Unless  a  man  be  born  again,  he  cannot  discern  the kingdom of heaven' — unless a man be born of water and the Spirit, he cannot enter into it. 

But let no man think that in the act of being born, either naturally or metaphorically, the child purchases, procures, or merits either life  or  its  enjoyments.  He  is  only  by  his  birth  placed  in circumstances  favorable  to  the  enjoyment  of  life,  and  all  that makes life a blessing. 'To as many as receive him, believing in his name, he grants the privilege of being children of God, who derive their birth not from blood, nor from the desire of the flesh, nor from the will of man, but from God.' 

***Renewing of the Holy Spirit*** 

'He  has  saved  us,'  says  the  Apostle  Paul,  'by  the  bath  of regeneration and the *renewing of the Holy Spirit,* which he poured on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior; that being justified by his favor, we might be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life.' Thus, and not by works of righteousness, he has saved us. Consequently, being born of water and the renewing of the Holy Spirit  are  not  works  of  merit  or  of  righteousness,  but  only  the means of enjoyment. But this pouring out of the influences, this renewing  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  is  as  necessary  as  the  bath  of regeneration to the salvation of the soul, and to the enjoyment of the hope of heaven, of which the Apostle speaks. In the kingdom into  which  we  are  born  of  water,  the  Holy  Spirit  is  as  the atmosphere in the kingdom of nature — we mean that the influences of  the  Holy  Spirit  are  as  necessary  to  *the  new  life,*  as  the atmosphere is to our animal life in the kingdom of nature. All that is done in us before regeneration, God our Father effects by *the word,* or the gospel as dictated and confirmed by his Holy Spirit. But after we are thus begotten and born by the Spirit of God — after our new birth — the Holy Spirit is shed on us richly through Jesus Christ our Savior; of which the peace of mind, the love, the joy, and the hope of the regenerate is full proof; for these are amongst the fruits of that the Holy Spirit of promise of which we speak. Thus commences (The next chapter) 

3. The New Life 

'*Newness of life*' is a Hebraism for a *new life.* The new birth brings us into a new state. 'Old things have passed away; all things have become new,' says an Apostle: 'for if any one be in Christ, he is a new creature.' A new spirit, a new heart, and an outward character, corresponding to this change, are the effects of the regenerating process:  'for  the  end  of  the  change,'  the  grand  results  of  the remedial system, is 'love out of a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned.' 'Love is the fulfilling of the whole law,' and the  fruit  of  the  whole gospel.  It  is  the  cardinal  principle  of  all Christian behavior, the soul of the new man, the breath of the new life. Faith works by no other rule. It is a working principle, and love is the rule by which it operates. The Spirit of God is the spirit of love and the health of a sound mind. Every pulsation of the new heart is the impulse of the spirit of love. Hence the brotherhood is beloved, and all mankind embraced in unbounded good will. When the tongue speaks, the hands and the feet move and operate under the unrestrained guidance of this principle, we have the Christian character  drawn  to  the  life.  For  meekness,  humility,  mercy, sympathy,  and  active  benevolence,  are  only  the  names  of  the various workings of this all-renovating, invigorating, sanctifying, and happifying principle. 'He that dwells in love dwells in God, and God in him.' 

The  Christian,  or  the  new  man,  is  then  a  philanthropist  to  the utmost extent of the meaning of that word. Truth and love have made him free from all the tyrannies of passion, from guilt, and fear and shame; have filled him with courage, active and passive. Therefore, his enterprise, his capital enterprise, to which all others minister, is to take part with our Savior in the salvation of the world. 'If by any means I may save some,' are not the words of Paul only, but of every *new man.* Are they merchants, mechanics, husbandmen? — are they magistrates, lawyers, judges, or unofficial citizens? — are  they  masters,  servants,  fathers,  sons,  brothers, neighbors? — whatever, or wherever they may be, they live for God and his city, for the King and his empire. They associate not with the children of wrath — the miser, the selfish, the prodigal, the gay, the  proud,  the  slanderer,  the  tattler,  the  rake,  the  libertine,  the drunkard, the thief, the murderer. Every new man has left these precincts; has broken his league with Satan and his slaves, and has joined  himself  to  the  family  of  God.  These  he  complacently loves — those he pities — and does good to all. 

The character of the new man is an elevated character. Feeling himself a son and an heir of God, he cultivates the temper, spirit, and behavior, which corresponds with so exalted a relation. He despises every thing mean, grovelling, earthly, sensual, devilish. As the only begotten and well beloved Son of God is to be the model of his future personal glory, so the character which Jesus sustained amongst men, is the model of his daily imitation. His everyday aspiration is —  

- Thy fair example will I trace, 

To teach me what I ought to be; Make me by thy transforming grace, Lord Jesus, daily more like thee." 

The law of God is hid in his heart. The living oracles dwell in his mind;  and  he  grows  in  favor  with  God  as  he  grows  in  the knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ his Lord. As a new born babe he desires the unadulterated milk of the word of God, that he may grow by it; for as the thirsty hart pants after the brooks of water, so pants his soul after God. Thus he lives to God, and walks with him. This is the character of the regenerate — of him that is born of God — of the new man in Christ Jesus. This is the change of heart, of life, and of character, which is the tendency and the fruit of the process of regeneration, as taught and exemplified by the Apostles, and those commended by God, in their writings. 

We now proceed to offer a few remarks on physical regeneration, the second part of our subject.  

4. Physical Regeneration ****

Our mortal bodies are yet to feel the regenerating power of the son of God. This is emphatically called '*the glory of his power.*' 'The redemption of the body' from the bondage of corruption, is the consummation  of  the  new  creating  energy  of  him  who  has immortality. Life and incorruptibility were displayed in and by his resurrection from the dead. It was great to create man in the image of God — greater to redeem his soul from general corruption; but greater  of  all,  to  give  to  his  mortal  frame  incorruptible  and immortal  vigor. The power displayed in  the  giving to  the dead body of the Son of God incorruptible glory and endless life, is set forth by the Apostle Paul, as incomparably surpassing every other divine work within the reach of human knowledge. He prays that the mind of Christians may be enlarged to apprehend this mighty power — that the Father of glory would open their minds, 'that they might know the exceeding greatness of his power in relation to us who believe — according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places.' Faith in this wonderful operation of God — hope for the riches of the glory of the inheritance  of  the  saints  in  light,  are  in  the  most  powerful principles of action,  which God has  ever planted in  the human breast. This is the transcendent hope of the Christian calling, which imparted such heroic courage to all the saints of eternal renown. This  better resurrection in  prospect,  has produced heroes which make cowards of all the boasted chiefs of worldly glory. As the magnetic needle ever points to the pole, so the mind, influenced by this hope, ever rises to the skies, and terminates in the fulness of joy, and the pleasures for evermore, in the presence and at the right hand of God. 

To raise a dead body to life again, is not set forth as more glorious, than by a touch to give new vigor to the palsied arm, to impart sight to the blind, or hearing to the deaf; but to give that raised body  the  deathless  vigor  of  incorruptibility,  to  renovate  and transform it in all its parts, and to make every spirit feel that it reanimates its own body, that it is as insusceptible of decay, as immortal as the Father of eternity, is a thought overwhelming to every mind, a development which will glorify the power of God, as the  sacrifice  of  his  Son  now  displays  his  righteousness, faithfulness, and love to the heavens and to the earth. 

This new birth from the dark prison of the grave, is fitly styled 'the redemption of the body' from bondage, '*the glorious liberty of the sons of God.*' As in our watery grave the old man is figuratively buried to rise no more, so in the literal grave, the prison of the body, we leave all that is corrupt; for he that makes all things new, will  raise  us  up in  his own  likeness,  and  present  us  before  his Father's face in all the glory of immortality. Then will regeneration be complete. Then will be the full revelation of the sons of God. 

Immortality, in the sacred writings, is never applied to the spirit of man. It is not the doctrine of Plato which the resurrection of Jesus proposes. It is the *immortality of the body* of which his resurrection is a proof and pledge. This was never developed till he became the first born from the dead, and in a human body entered the heavens. Jesus was not a spirit when he returned to God. He is not made the Head of the New Creation as a Spirit, but as the Son of Man. Our nature  in  his  person  is  glorified;  and  when  he  appears  to  our salvation, we shall be made like him: we shall see him as he is. This is the Christian hope. 

- A hope so great and so divine  

`  `May trials well endure,  

`  `And purge the soul from sense and sin,    As Christ himself is pure."  

` `Thus matters stand in the economy of redemption. Thus the divine scheme of regeneration is consummated: the moral part, by the operation of moral means; the physical part, by the mighty power of  God  operating  through  physical  means.  By  the  word  of  his power he created the heavens and the earth; by the word of his grace he reanimates the soul of man; and by the word of his power he will again form our bodies anew, and reunite the spirit and the body in the bonds of an incorruptible and everlasting union. Then shall death  "be swallowed up forever" "*Where now thy victory, boasting grave?*" But for this we must wait. 'We know not what we shall be.' We only know, that when he appears, we shall be like him; that we shall see him as he is.  

5. The Use of the Theory of Regeneration 

   One would imagine, from the voluminous arguments, debates, and sermons upon the theory of regeneration, that a sound theory was essential to salvation: that it must be preached in every sermon, in order to regenerate the hearers. Nothing can be more preposterous. Who can think that any theory of the resurrection or regeneration of the body can affect the body in the grave! As little can any theory affect the unregenerate, or those dead in trespasses and in sins. A sermon upon generation, or upon natural birth, would be as efficacious upon those unborn, in bringing them into this life, as a sermon  upon  moral  or  physical  regeneration.  This  explains  the fact, that in all the accounts of apostolical preaching to Jew and Gentile — in all the extracts of their sermons and speeches found in the  New  Testament,  the  subject  of  regeneration  is  not  once mentioned. It is, in all the historic books of the New Testament, but once propounded, but once named; and that only in a private conference  with  a  Jewish  Senator,  on  the  affairs  of  Christ's kingdom. No theory understood or believed by the unregenerate; no theory proposed to them for their acceptance, can avail anything to their regeneration. We might as reasonably deliver a theory of digestion  to  a  dyspeptic,  to  cure  his  stomach — or  a  theory  of vegetation to a scion, to hasten its growth, as to preach any view of regeneration to a sinner, to make him a Christian. 

Of what use, then, are the previous remarks on this subject? I will first candidly inform the reader, that they were not written for his regeneration, either of mind or body; but the benefit of those who are  employed  in  the  work  of  regenerating  others,  and  for  the conviction of such Christians as may have been induced to regard us as aiming at nothing, but the mere immersion of persons, as alone  necessary  to  the  whole  process  of  conversion  or regeneration, in their acceptation of the words.12 The use of this 

theory, if it have any, is, as a guide to those who are laboring publicly or privately for the regeneration of sinners. If we have assigned a proper place to facts, testimony, faith, feeling, action, the bath of regeneration, the renewing of the Holy Spirit, and a new life, the course is fairly marked out. They are to present the great facts, to declare the whole testimony of God to sinners, in order to their conversion or regeneration. Like Paul, in his account of his labors in Corinth, they must go out, not in the strength of human philosophy, '*but declaring the testimony of God,*' and laying before their hearers 'the wonderful works of God.' 

This is the use, and the only proper use of sound theory on any subject. It is to guide the operator, not the thing operated on. I would  hope,  under  the  Divine  blessing,  to  be  the  means  of regenerating  more  persons  in  one  year,  never  once  naming regeneration,  nor  speculating  upon  the  subject,  by  stating  and enforcing the testimony of God, than by preaching daily the most approved theory of regeneration ever sanctioned by any sanhedrim on earth.13 With these views, we have, then, offered the preceding 

remarks;  and  shall  now  briefly  turn  our  attention  to  (the  next chapter) 

6. The Regeneration of the Church ****

   The word *regeneration,* we have found once used in the sense of a new  state  of  things,  or  of  the  introduction  of  a  new  state  of things.14  In  this  application  of  the  word,  we  would  turn  the 

attention of our readers to the necessity of the regeneration of the church. 

I  speak  not  of  the  regeneration  of  any  sectarian  establishment. They are built upon another foundation — upon the foundation of decrees of councils, creeds, formularies, or acts of Parliament. But we  speak  of  those  societies  that  professedly  build  upon  the foundation of Apostles and Prophets, without any human bond of union,  or  rule  of  life — our  brethren  of  the  reformation,  or regeneration, now in process. 

Should any one imagine that the state of things to which we have attained, is the sole, or ultimate object of our aspirations or our efforts, he would do us the greatest injury. Societies, indeed, may be found amongst us, far in advance of others, in their progress towards the ancient order of things; but we know of none that has fully attained to that model. It is, however, most acceptable to see so  many  societies  formed  and  forming,  under  the  banners  of reformation,  with  the  determination  to  move  onwards  in conformity  to  the  sacred  oracles,  till  they  stand  perfect  and complete in all the will of God. 

Our opponents cannot, or will not, understand how any society can be in progress to a better order of things, than that under which they  may  have  commenced  their  pilgrimage.  Their  sectarian policies were soon formed, and the limits of their reformation were soon fixed; beyond which it soon became heretical to move. The founders of all new schisms not only saw through a glass darkly, but their horizon was so circumscribed with human traditions, that they only aimed at moving a few paces from the hive in which they were generated. A new creed was soon adopted, and then their stature was complete. They bounded from infancy to manhood in a few days, and decided, if any presumed farther to advance, they should be treated as those who had refused to move from the old hive.  Hence  it  became  as  censurable  to  grow  beyond  a  certain standard, as not to grow at all. This never was our proposition, and never can be our object. We have no new creed to form, no rules of discipline to adopt. We have taken the Living Oracles as our creed, our  rules  and  measures  of  faith  and  practice;  and  in  this department,  have  no  additions,  alterations,  nor  amendments  to propose. But in coming up to this standard of knowledge, faith, and behavior, we have something yet before us, to which we have not attained. 

That  we may be distinctly understood on this subject,  we shall speak  particularly  on  the  things  wanting  in  our  individual characters, and of the things wanting in our church order, to give to our meetings that interest and influence which they ought to exert on the brotherhood and on society at large. 

It will be understood, that our remarks on the things which are wanting in the disciples, are applicable not to every individual, but to  the  general  mass.  And  first  of  all,  there  is  wanting  a  more general and particular knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, than is possessed by a great majority of the reformers. There is, perhaps, wanting a taste or disposition for that private devotional reading of the  oracles  of  God,  which  is  essential  to  a  growth  in  that knowledge of God and of Jesus Christ, which constitutes the most striking attributes in Christian character. We thus reason from the proficiency  which  is  discoverable  in  the  bounds  of  our acquaintance,  which  is  large  enough  to  afford  data  for  every general conclusion.  

To read the Scriptures for the sake of carrying out into practice all that we learn, and to read them for the sake of knowing what is written, are very different objects, and will produce very different results. Their influence on the temper and behavior, in the former case,  will  very  soon  become  manifest  to  all  with  whom  we associate; while, in the latter case, there is no visible improvement. David said that he 'hid the word of God in his heart,' or laid it up in his mind, 'that he might not sin against God;' and that he had 'more understanding  than  all  his  teachers,  because  God's  testimonies were his meditation.' It will be admitted that the sacred writings of the  Apostles  and  Evangelists  of  Jesus  Christ  ought  to  be  as precious  and  as  delightful  to  the Christian,  as  were the  ancient oracles to the most pious Jews. Now as an example of what we mean by a private devotional reading and study of the oracles of Christ, we shall permit a Jew to tell his experience: —  

'The law of thy mouth is better to me than thousands of gold and silver. With my whole heart have I sought thee; my soul breaketh for  the  longing  that  it  has  to  thy  judgments  at  all  times.  Thy testimonies are my delight and my counsellors. Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes, and I will keep it to the end. Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yes, I will observe it with my whole heart. Make me to go in the path of thy commandments, for in it do I delight. Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage. At midnight I will rise to give thanks to thee, because of thy righteous judgments. Oh, how I love thy law; it is my meditation all the day! How sweet are thy words to my taste; sweeter than honey to my mouth! Thy testimonies have I taken as a heritage forever, for they are the rejoicing of my heart. Great peace have they that love thy law — nothing shall cause them to stumble.' 

These are only a few extracts from one piece, written by a king three thousand years ago. One another occasion he pronounced the following encomium on the testimony of God: —  

'The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul: the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple: the statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the heart: the commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring forever;  the  judgments  of  the  Lord  are  true  and  righteous altogether. More to be desired are they than gold — yea, than much fine gold; sweeter also than honey, and the honey-comb. By them is  thy  servant  warned,  and  in  keeping  of  them  there  is  great reward.' 

This fully reveals all that we mean by a devotional private study of the Holy Scriptures. Every Christian who can read, may every day thus  refresh,  strengthen,  and  comfort  his  heart,  by  reading  or committing  to  memory,  and  afterwards  reflecting  upon  some portion  of  the  book.  He  may  carry  in  his  pocket  the  blessed volume, and many a time through the day take a peep into it. This will preserve him from  temptation, impart courage to his heart, give fluency to his tongue, and the graces of Christianity to his life. 

In  this  age,  when  ignorance  of  the  Christian  Scriptures  is  so characteristic, and the rage for human opinions and traditions so rampant, it is a duty doubly imperative on our brethren, to give themselves much more to the study of the book; and then one of them will put a host of aliens to flight; and, what is still more desirable, he will have communion with God all the day, and ever rejoice in his salvation. 

In the second place, there is wanting among disciples, who are heads of families, more attention, much more effort, to bring up their children 'in the correction and instruction of the Lord.' The children of all disciplines should be taught the oracles of God from the first dawning of reason. The good seed should be sown in their hearts, before the strong seeds of vice can take root. *From a child* Timothy knew the Holy Scriptures, and they were able to make him wise to salvation, through the Christian faith. How many more Timothies might we have, if we had a few more of the daughters of Lois, and a few more mothers like Eunice! Most saints, in this generation, appear more zealous that their children should shine on earth, than in heaven — and that they may be rich here, at the hazard of eternal bankruptcy. They labor to make them rich and genteel, rather than pure and holy; and spend more time in fashioning them to the foolish and wicked taste of *polished* society, than in teaching them by precept and example, the word that is better than gold and more precious than rubies. Well, they sow darnel, and cannot reap wheat. They may have a mournful harvest, and years of bitterness and sorrow may reward them for their negligence and error. If only a tithe of the time, and the labor, and expense that it costs to fit a son or a daughter to shine in the middle or front ranks of *genteel* society, were spent in teaching them to fear God and to keep his commandments,  how  many  more  virtuous,  solid,  and  useful citizens — how  many  more  valuable  members  of  the  family  of God — how many more faithful and able witnesses for the truth of God, would be found in all corners of the land! 

Every  Christian  family  ought  to  be  a  nursery  for  God.  Their offspring should be trained for the skies. For such are the promises of God, such are the facts on record, and such is the experience of Christians, that every parent who does his duty to his children may expect to see them inherit the blessing. Their didactic labors, aided by their example and their constant prayers, will seldom or never fail of success in influencing their descendants to walk in their ways. The very command to bring up their children in the Lord, implies its practicability. And both Testaments furnish us with all assurance that such labors will not be in vain. The men of high renown  in  sacred  history,  were  generally  the  sons  of  such parentage. The sons of God were found among the sons of Seth, while the daughters of men were of the progeny of Cain. Abraham was the descendant of Shem; Moses and Aaron were the sons of believing parents; Samuel was the son of Hannah, and David was the son of Jesse. John the harbinger was the son of Zachariah and Elizabeth; and it pleased the heavenly father, that his Son should be the child of a pious virgin. 

But it is under Christ that the faithful are furnished with all the necessary means of bringing up their offspring for the Lord. The numerous failures which we witness, are to be traced either to great neglect, or to some fatal notion which paralyzes all effort; for some think  that  the  salvation  or  damnation  of  their  offspring  was  a matter settled for all eternity, irrespective of any agency on their part: that some are born 'vessels of wrath,' and other 'vessels of mercy;'  and  hence  the  instructions,  examples,  and  prayers  of parents are of no avail. Among the descendents of such, it will no doubt  often  happen  that  *become*  vessels  of  wrath  fitted  for destruction, while others *become* vessels of mercy, predestinated to glory. 

When God gave a revelation to Jacob, and commanded a law to Israel,  he  gave  it  in  charge  that  they  should  'teach  it  to  their children, that they might *put their trust in God,* and might not be, like their fathers, a rebellious race.' The Apostles of Christ have also taught the Christians the same lesson. This is our guide, and not  our  own  reasonings.  Now  let  the  disciples  make  this  their business, morning, noon, and evening, and then we shall see its effects. 

We  are  sorry  to  see  this  great  duty,  to  which  nature,  reason, revelation  alike  direct,  so  much  neglected  by  many  of  our brethren — to find amongst their children those who are no better acquainted with the Scriptures than the children of their neighbors, who  believe  in  miraculous  conversions,  or  think  it  is  a  sin  to attempt what they imagine to be the work of God alone — never suspecting that God works by human means, and employs human agency in his works of providence and redemption. 

I  never  knew  but  a  very  few  families  that  made  it  their  daily business to train up their children in the knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, to cause them every day to commit to memory a portion of the living oracles; but these few instances authorize me to think, and to say, that such a course persisted in, and sustained by the good example of parents, will very generally, if not universally, issue in the salvation of their children. And before any one says, I have found an exception to the proverbs of Solomon, which says, 'Train up a child in the way he should go, and when he is old he will not depart from it,' — let him show that this child was '*trained up in the way he should go.*' 

In the third place, there is wanting among the disciples, a stricter regard  to  relative  duties — we  mean,  not  only  the  duties  which justice, truth, and moderation claim; but *all* relative duties. So long as Christians live after the manner of men in the flesh, according to the fashion of this world, they must, like other men, contract debts which they cannot promptly pay, make covenants and bargains, give promises which they cannot fulfil, and stake pledges which they are unable to redeem. All this is wholly incompatible with our profession. Such were not the primitive disciples. Sceptics of every name, men of the world, who have ever read the New Testament, know that such behavior is utterly incompatible with the letter and spirit of Christianity. A Christian's word or promise ought to be, and is, if Christ be honored, as solemn and obligatory as any bond. And as for breach of bargain or covenant, even where it is greatly or wholly to the disadvantage of the Christians, it is not even to be thought of — 'he changes not, though to his hurt he covenants.' How much  has  the  gospel  lost  of  its  influence,  because  of  the faithlessness of its professors! O! when shall it be again said of Christians in general, that 'they bind themselves, as with a solemn oath, not to commit any kind of wickedness — to be guilty neither of theft, robbery, nor adultery — *never to break a promise,* or to keep back  a  deposit  when  called  upon.'  Pliny  writes  to  the  Emperor Trajan that such was the character of Christians A. D. 106-7, as far as he could learn it from those who were not Christians. Were all the  common  (now-a-days  rather  *uncommon*)  virtues  of  justice, truth,  fidelity,  honesty,  practiced  by  all  Christians,  how  many mouths would be stopped, and how many new arguments in favor of Jesus Christ could all parties find! But even were these common virtues as general as the Christian profession, there are the other finer virtues of benevolence, goodness, mercy, sympathy, which belong to the profession, expressed in taking care of the sick, the orphan,  the  widow — in  alleviating  all  the  afflictions  of  our fellow-creatures. Add these virtues, or *graces,* as we sometimes call them, to the others, and then how irresistible the argument for the  divine  authenticity  of  the  gospel!  Let  industry,  frugality, temperance,  honesty,  justice,  truth,  fidelity,  humility,  mercy, sympathy, appear conspicuous in the lives of the disciples, and the contrast between them and other professors will plead their cause more successfully than a hundred preachers. 

In the last place, there is wanting a more elevated piety to bring up the Christian character to the standard of primitive times. We want not  fine  speeches  nor  eloquent  orations  on  the  excellencies  of Christian piety and devotion. These are generally acknowledged. But  we  need  to  be  roused  from  our  supineness,  from  our worldly-mindedness, from our sinful conformities to an apostate generation, to the exhibition of that holiness in speech, in behavior, without which no one shall see the Lord. What mean the numerous exhortations of the Apostles to watchfulness and prayer, if these are not essential to our devotion to God and consecration to his service? 

If our affections are not placed on things above, we are unfit for the  kingdom  of  glory.  To  see  the  folly  of  a  profession  of Christianity without the power of godliness, we have only to put the question, How is that person fit for the enjoyment of God and Christ, whose heart is filled with the cares, anxieties, and concerns of this life — whose whole life is a life of labor and care for the body — a life of devotion to the objects of time and sense? No man can serve God and Mammon. Where the treasure is, the heart must also be. Thither the affections turn their course. There is no room for the residence of the Spirit of God in a mind devoted to the affairs of this life. The spirit of the policies of this world, and the Spirit  of  God,  cannot  dwell  in  the  same  heart.  If  Jesus  or  his Apostles taught any one doctrine clearly, fully, and unequivocally, it is this doctrine, that 'the cares of this world, the lusts of other things, and the deceitfulness of riches, stifle the word, and render it unfruitful.' 

If any one would enjoy the power of godliness, he must give up his whole  soul  to  it.  The  business  of  this  life  will  be  performed religiously, as a duty subordinate to the will of God. While his hands are engaged in that business which his own wants, or those of  his  household  make  necessary,  his  affections  are  above.  He delights in God, and communes with him all the day. A Christian is not one who is pious by fits and starts, who is religious or devout one day of the week, or for one hour of the day. It is the whole bent of his soul — it is the beginning, middle, and end of every day. To make his calling and election sure, is the business of his life. His mind rests only in God. He places the Lord always before him. This is his joy and delight. He would not for the world have it otherwise.  He  would  not  enjoy  eternal  life,  if  he  had  it  at  his option,  in  any  other  way  than  that  which  God  himself  has proposed. He accedes to God's arrangements, not of necessity, but of choice. His religious services are perfect freedom. He is free indeed. The Lord's commandments are not grievous, but joyful. The yoke of Christ to him is easy, and his burthen light. He will sing, with David —  

`  `The love that to thy laws I bear,  

`  `No language can display;  

`  `They with fresh wonders entertain    My ravish'd thoughts all day.  

`  `The law that from thy mouth proceeds,  

`  `Of more esteem I hold,  

`  `Than untouch'd stores, than thousand mines    Of silver and of gold.  

`  `Whilst in the way of thy commands,    More solid joy I found,  

`  `Than had I been with vast increase    Of envied riches crown'd.  

`  `Thy testimonies I have kept,  

`  `And constantly obey'd;  

`  `Because the love I bore to them    Thy service easy made.  

` `In the same ratio as Christians devoutly study the oracles of God, teach them to their children, practice all relative duties to society at large, and rise to a more elevated piety, they will increase their influence in the great and heavenly work of regenerating the world. 

A few remarks  on the  things  wanting in  the order of Christian assemblies,  to  give  to  their  public  meetings  that  influence  on themselves and on society at large, will finish this section of our essay. 

Our heavenly Father wills our happiness in all its institutions. His ordinances are, therefore, the surest,  the simplest, and the most direct  means of promoting our  happiness. The  Lord Jesus  gave himself  for  the  church  that  he  might  purify  and  bless  it;  and, therefore, in the church are all the institutions which can promote the  individual  and  social  good  of  the  Christian  community.  In attending upon these institutions on the Lord's day, much depends upon the preparation of heart in all who unite to commemorate the death and resurrection of the Son of God. 

In  adverting  to  the  most  scriptural  and  rational  manner  of celebrating or observing the day of the Lord, both for their own comfort and the regeneration of the world, we would first of all remark, that much depends upon the frame of mind, or preparation of heart, in which we visit the assemblies of the saints. 

Suppose two persons, A and B, if you please, members of the same church, take their seats together at the Lord's table. A, from the time  he  opened  his  eyes  in  the  morning,  was  filled  with  the recollections  of  the  Savior's  life,  death,  and  resurrection.  In  his closet,  in  his  family,  and  along  the  way,  he  was  meditating  or conversing  on  the  wonders  of  redemption,  and  renewing  his recollections of the sayings and doings of the Messiah. B, on the other hand, arose as on other days, and finding himself free from all obligations arising from the holiness of the time, talks about the common affairs of every day, and allows his thoughts to roam over the business of the last week, or, perhaps, to project the business of the next. If he meet with a neighbor, friend, or brother, the news of the day is inquired after, expatiated upon, discussed; the crops, the markets, the public health, or the weather — the affairs of Europe, or the doings of Congress, or the prospects of some candidate for political honor — become the theme of conversation. As he rides or walks to the church, he chats upon all, or any of these topics, till he enter the door of the meeting house. Now, as A and B enter the house in very different states of mind, may it not be supposed that they will differ as much in their enjoyments, as in their morning thoughts? Or can B, by a single effort, unburthen his mind, call in the wanderings of his thoughts, and in a moment transport himself from the contemplation of things on earth to things in heaven? If this can be imagined, then meditation and preparation of heart are wholly unnecessary to the acceptable worship of God, and to the comfortable enjoyment of his institutions. 

But is it compatible with experience, or is it accordant to reason, that  B  can  delight  in  God,  and  rejoice  in  commemorating  the wonders of redemption, while his thoughts are dissipated upon the mountains of a thousand vanities? — while, like a fool's eyes, his thoughts are roaming to the ends of the earth? Can he say, with a pious Jew, 'How amiable are thy tabernacles, O Lord of hosts! My soul longs — yes, even faints, for the courts of the Lord! My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God. Happy they who dwell in thy house; they will be still praising thee! A day in thy courts is better than a thousand. I had rather be a door-keeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness.' — 'One thing have I desired of the Lord, and that I will seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of my life, to behold the beauty of the Lord, and to inquire in his temple. O send out thy light and thy truth! Let them lead me, let them bring me to thy holy hill and to thy tabernacles. Then will I go to the altar of God, to God my exceeding joy; yes, I will praise thee, O God, my God!' 

Or had the Jew a sublimer worship, more exalted views of God's salvation, and more piety, than a Christian? Or were the ordinances of the Jewish sanctuary more entertaining and refreshing than the ordinances  of  the  Christian  church?  This  will  not  be  alleged; consequently, B, and all of that school, are utterly at fault when they approach the house of God, in such a state of mind as they approach the market place, the forum, or the common resorts of this present world. 

Christians need not say, in excuse for themselves, that all days are alike, that all places and times are alike holy, and that they ought to be in the best frame of mind all the time. For even concede them all their own positions, they will not contend that a man ought to speak  to  God,  or  to  come  into  the  presence  of  God,  as  they approach men. They will not say that they ought to have the same thoughts  or  feelings  in  approaching  the  Lord's  table,  as  in approaching a common table; or on entering a court of political justice, as in coming into the house of God. There is, in the words of Solomon the Wise, a season and time for every object and for every work: There is the Lord's day, the Lord's table, the Lord's house, and the Lord's people; and there are thoughts, and frames of mind, and behavior compatible and incompatible with all these. In the public assembly the whole order of worship ought to do justice to what is passing in the minds of all the worshippers. That joy in the Lord, that peace and serenity of mind, that affection of the  brethren,  that  reverence  for  the  institutions  of  God's  house, which all feel, should be manifest in all the business of the day. Nothing that would do injustice to all or any of these ought ever to appear in the congregation of Jesus Christ our Lord. No levity, irreverence, no gloom, no sadness, no pride, no unkindness, no severity of behavior towards any, no coldness, nothing but love, and peace, and joy, humility, and reverence, should appear in the face, in the word, or action of any disciple. 

These are not little matters. They all exert a salutary influence on the  brethren  and  the  strangers.  These  are  visible  and  sensible displays of the temper and spirit of Christians; and if Paul thought it expedient to write of *veils* and *long hair* when admonishing a church "to do all things decently and in order," we, in this day of degeneracy, may be allowed to notice matters and things as minute as those before us. 

We intend not now to go into details of church order or Christian discipline, nor to expatiate on the necessity of devoting a part of the  time  to  singing,  praying,  reading,  teaching,  exhorting, commemorating, communicating; nor on how much of this or that is  expedient.  Times  and  circumstances,  must  decide  how  much time shall be taken up in these exercises, and when it shall be most fitting to meet, to adjourn, etc. Nor is it necessary now to say, that there  must  be  scriptural  order,  and  presidency,  and  proper discipline, and due subordination to one another in the fear of God. We now speak rather of the *manner* in which all things are to be done, and of the things themselves, their necessity or value.  

After noticing what in some instances appear to be wanting in the manner of coming together on the Lord's day, we proceed to notice in  order  the  things  wanting  in  many  congregations,  for  the purposes already specified. 

And first of all, be it observed, that in some churches there appears to be wanting *a proper method of handling the Scriptures, to the edification of the brethren.* It is admitted by all the holy brethren, that the Scriptures of truth, called *the living oracles,* are the great instrument  of  God  for  all  his  purposes  in  the  saints  on  earth. Through them they are converted to God, comforted, consecrated, made meet for an inheritance among the sanctified, and qualified for every good word and work. Every thing, then, depends upon the proper understanding of these volumes of inspiration. They can only operate as far as they are understood. 

The system of sermonizing on a text is now almost universally abandoned, by all who intend that their hearers should understand the testimony of God. Orators and exhorters may select a word, a phrase,  or  a  verse;  but  all  who  feed  the  flock  of  God  with knowledge and understanding, know that this method is  wholly absurd. Philological lectures upon a chapter are only a little better. The discussion of any particular topic, such as faith, repentance, election, the Christian calling, may sometimes be expedient: but in a  congregation  of  Christians,  the  reading  and  examining  the different  books  in  regular  succession,  every  disciple  having  the volume  in  his  hand,  following  up  the  connection  of  things, examining parallel passages, interrogating and being interrogated, fixing the meaning of particular words and phrases, by comparison with  the  style  of  that  writer  or  speaker,  or  with  that  of  others; intermingling these exercises with prayer and praises, and keeping the narrative, the epistle, the speech, so long as before the minds of all, as is necessary for the youngest disciple in the congregation to understand it, and to become deeply interested in it, will do more in  one  year,  than  is  done  in  many,  on  the  plan  of  the  popular meetings of the day. 

Great attention should be paid to all allusions, in any composition, to  the  particularities  of  time,  place,  and  circumstance,  to  the geographical,  historical,  and  chronological  particulars  of  all questions  of  fact  connected  with  all  persons  of  note  in  the narratives: for these are often the best interpreters of style, and expositors of the meaning of what is written.  

This searching, examining, comparing, and ruminating upon the Holy  Scriptures  in  private,  in  the  family,  in  the  congregation, cannot fail to make us learned in the knowledge of God, and in the knowledge of man. The Bible contains more real learning than all the  volumes  of  men.  It  instructs  us  in  all  our  natural,  moral, political,  and  religious  relations.  Though  it  teaches  us  not astronomy,  medicine,  chemistry,  mathematics,  architecture,  it gives us all that knowledge which adorns and dignifies our moral nature, and fits us for happiness. Happy the person who meditates upon it day and night! He grows and flourishes in moral health and vigor, as the trees upon the water courses. His leaf never fades — his fruit never fails. 

The  congregations  of  the  saints  want  system  in  furthering  the knowledge of this book. The simple reading of large portions in a desultory manner, is not without some good effect; for there is light, and majesty, and life, in all the oracles of God; no man can listen  to  them  without edification.  But  the  profit  accruing  from such readings, is not a tithe of that which might be obtained in the proper  systematic  reading  and  examination  of  them.  The congregation is the school of Christ, and every pupil there should feel that he has learned something every day he waits upon his Master. He must take the Master's book with him, and, like every other good and orderly pupil, he must open it and study it, with all the helps that the brotherhood, his school-fellows, can furnish for his  more  comprehensive  knowledge  of  all  its  salutary communications. 

A Christian scribe, well instructed in its contents, or a plurality of such, who can bring out of their intellectual treasury things new and old, will greatly advance the students in this heavenly science; but, in the absence of such, the students must be self-taught; and self-taught scholars are generally the best taught: for they cannot progress, unless they study with diligence, and carefully learn the rudiments of every science. 

To give some idea of the diligence and attention to the minutest matters, which are necessary to proficiency in the knowledge of all that is written in the New Testament, we shall suppose that the disciples have for their lesson, on some particular day, the Nativity of  the  Messiah.  The  second  chapter  of  Matthew  is  read.  After reading this chapter, or the whole of the first section of Matthew's Testimony, the elder or president for the day asks some brother, a good reader, to read what the other evangelists have testified on this subject. Mark and John being silent on the nativity, he reads Luke 2d chapter, from the 1st to the 41st verse. After the reading of this chapter, the following points are the subject of inquiry, and most of them are proposed to the brethren for solution: —  

1. Who was  Cesar Augustus,  and over what  people did  he reign?  
1. At  what  period  of  his  reign  was  the  edict  of  enrolment issued, or when did the first register take effect?  
1. What did Syria include, and what were its boundaries?  
1. Who presided over Syria at the time of the first register?  
1. Who was king in Judea at this time?  
1. How far did Judea extend, or in what part of the Holy Land was it situated?  
1. In  what  country  was  Jerusalem,  where  situated,  and  by what other names was it known?  
1. What was the native city of Joseph?  
1. Where was Nazareth situated, and in what district?  
1. What  was  the  boundary  of  Galilee,  and  what  were  its principal towns?  
1. In what canton or district was Bethlehem, and how far from Jerusalem?  
1. Who were the magians?  
1. Why  was  'Herod  alarmed,  and  all  Jerusalem  with  him,' when the magians reported the Star in the East?  
1. What  were  the  scribes  and  chief  priests  assembled  by Herod, and why were they called together?  
15. By what means did they decide the questions referred to them?  
15. On  what  Prophet  do  they  rely,  and  where  shall  the quotation be found?  
15. Of what family and lineage were Joseph and Mary?  
15. By what means did the magians find the house in which the Messiah was born?  
15. Why did the magians not return to Herod?  
15. Whether  did  the  shepherds  of  Bethlehem,  or  the  eastern magians, first pay their respects to the Messiah?  
15. In what quarter of the globe does Egypt lie?  
15. How far from Bethlehem?  
15. How long was the Messiah kept in Egypt?  
15. Who predicted his return from Egypt, and where shall it be found?  
15. Who  foretold  the  slaughter  of  the  male  infants  in Bethlehem,  and  what  instigated  Herod  to  this  cruel massacre?  
15. Who succeeded Herod in the throne of Judea?  
15. Why did Joseph retire to Nazareth?  
15. What Prophet foretold this circumstance, and where shall it be found? 

These  matters  being  all  ascertained,  to  which  the  maps, geographical and chronological indexes, and the appendix to the Family Testament, will greatly contribute, some moral reflections will  naturally  occur;  for  in  all  these  incidents  are  manifest  the wisdom,  care,  and  economy  of  our  heavenly  Father,  his faithfulness,  condescension,  and  love;  the  great  variety  of  his instruments, and agents; the ease with which he frustrates the evil counsels and machinations of his enemies; the infallible certainty of his foreknowledge; the perfect free agency of men, good and evil;  the  deep  humiliation  of  his  only-begotten  Son  in  all  the circumstances of his nativity. Irresistible arguments in favor for his pretensions  may  be  drawn  from  these  ancient  prophecies,  from their minuteness of time, place, and circumstance; many eloquent and powerful lessons on human pride, vanity, and arrogance may be deduced from the birth-place, cradle, and family connections of the Heir of the Universe; and many other touching appeals to the heart, which the birth, circumcision, and dedication of the Messiah, with all the incidents in Bethlehem, Jerusalem, and the Temple, connected with his first appearance on earth furnish, will present themselves, with unfading freshness and beauty, to the brotherhood of Christ. 

A hint to the wise is sufficient. Were this method pursued only two hours every Lord's day, every disciple giving his heart to the work; and were the results then compared with the products of the scrap Doctors or sermonizers to sleeping and dreaming hearers, no man, having any regard for his reputation for good sense, could give his vote for the popular system. 

A reformation in the manner of handling the living oracles is much wanting; and the sooner and more generally it is attempted, the greater will be the regenerating influence of the brotherhood on the world. Intelligent in the Holy Scriptures, clothed with the armor of light,  every  disciple  going  forth  will  be  a  David  against  the Philistines — a host against the armies of the aliens. And better still, the words of heavenly favor dwelling in his heart, he will carry with him into every society a fragrance like the rose of Sharon — a sweetness of perfume like a garden which the Lord has blessed. 

There  appears  to  be  wanting  in  some  congregations  a  proper attention  to  discipline,  and  a  due  regard  to  decorum,  in  the management of such cases as occur. In every family, and in every congregation,  there  is  occasional  need  of  discipline.  Offences, delinquencies, and apostacies, did occur in the congregations over which the apostles either were, or had been, presidents; and they will happen again in this state of discipline and trial, in which we are  all  placed.  They  must  be  expected;  and  every  congregation ought to be prepared to act upon the emergency with intelligence and  decorum.  Much  injury  has  been  done  to  the  progress  of churches,  by  a  remission  in  attention  to  such  cases,  and  in  the manner they have been disposed of when taken up. 

Nothing can be more preposterous and revolting to every sentiment of good order and decorum, than that every offender and offence should, at the very offset, be dragged into the public assembly. Persons who have the care of a congregation, the seniors whose age and experience have taught them prudence, ought to be first informed of such cases; and they ought to present the matter to the congregation.  Every  novice  is  not  to  feel  himself  at  liberty  to disturb the congregation by presenting, on his own responsibility, and at his own discretion, a complaint against a brother, whether it be of a public or private nature. 

But  we  are  now  speaking  of  the  *manner*  of  procedure  in  such cases. The most tender regard for the feelings of all, the utmost sympathy  for  the  offender,  the  most  unyielding  firmness  in applying  the  correctives  which  the  Head  of  the  church  has commanded, and the necessity of acting promptly in accordance with the law in the case, are matters of much importance. 

No  passion,  no  partiality,  no  bad  feeling — nothing  but  love  and piety,  but  faithfulness  and  truth;  nothing  but  courtesy  and gentleness, should ever appear in the house of God. And when any one is found guilty and excluded from the society, it should be done  with  all  solemnity,  and  with  prayer  that  the  institution  of Christ may be a blessing to the transgressor. 

But evil-doers, or those that act not honorably according to the law of Christ, ought not to be tolerated in the professed family of God. Such  persons  are  a  dead  weight  on  the  whole  society — spots  in every feast of love, and blemishes upon the whole profession. One sinner  destroys  much  good;  yet  separation  or  abscission,  like amputation, is only to be used in the last stage, when all other remedies,  of  remonstrance  and  admonition,  expostulation  and entreaty,  have  failed.  To  prevent  gangrene,  or  an  injury  to  the whole  body,  amputation  is  necessary,  an  indispensable  remedy. More strictness, more firmness, and more tenderness in such cases, would add greatly to the moral influence of every society. A few persons walking together in the bonds of Christian affection, and under the discipline of Christ, is better than the largest assembly in which there are visibly and manifestly, many who fear not God, and keep not his commandments. 

In the house of God, all should be purity, reverence, meekness, brotherly  kindness,  and  love.  Confidence  in  the  honesty  and sincerity  of  our  brethren,  is  the  life  of  communion.  To  feel ourselves united with them who are determined for eternal life, and resolved to seek first of all, chief of all, above all, the kingdom of heaven: and the righteousness required in it, is most animating, comforting, exhilarating. But to be doubtful whether we are uniting with a mass of ignorance, corruption, and apathy, is a rottenness in the bones; love waxes cold, and then we have the form, without the power of godliness. 

That the church may have a regenerating influence upon society at large, there is wanting a fuller display of Christian philanthropy in all  her  public  meetings;  care  for  the  poor,  manifested  in  the liberality  of  her  contributions;  the  expression  of  the  most unfeigned sympathy for the distresses of mankind, not only among the brotherhood, but among all men; and an ardent zeal for the conversion of sinners proportioned to her professed appreciation of the value of her own salvation, and to her resources and means of enlightening the world, on the things unseen and eternal. The full display of these attributes, is the most efficient means of causing the gospel to sound abroad, and to achieve new conquests among our fellow citizens. The Christian health and vigor of every church, is to be estimated more by her exertions and success in bringing sinners home to God, than by all her other attainments. Too long has it been considered the duty, the almost exclusive duty of the preacher, to convert the world. He must spend his time, and wear out  his  constitution  in  journeyings  and  preachings,  while  the individual members of the church are to mind their own business, seek their own wealth and domestic comfort. He must endure the heat and the cold, forsake his wife and family, and commit the management of his affairs to others, while they have only to look on and pray for his success. Strange infatuation! Has he received a commission from the skies — has he been drafted out of the ranks to go to war, and they all left at home to take care of their wives and children! Some may believe this — some may imagine that it is his duty alone to spend his time and his talents in this work, and theirs daily to labor for their own interest and behoof; but surely such are not the views and feelings of our brethren! 

The work of the Lord will never progress — or in other words, the regenerating  influence  of  the  church  will  amount  to  little  or nothing, so long as it is thought to be not equally the duty of every member, or the special duty of one or two, denominated preachers, to labor for the Lord. 

There is either a special call, a general call, or no call at all, to labor for the conversion of the world. If there be a few specially called, the rest have nothing to do but to mind their own concerns; 'to seek their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ.' If none be called, then it is the duty of none, and the Lord has nothing for his people to do — no world to convert; or, at least, nothing for them  to  do  in  that  work.  None  of  us  are  prepared  for  the consequences of either of these assumptions. It follows, then, that it is the duty of all to labor according to their respective abilities in this work. All are called to labor for the Lord. I hold that every citizen in Christ's kingdom is bound to take up arms for the King, as much as I am; and if he cannot go to the fight the battles of the Lord, he must take care of the wives and children of those who can, and will fight for their King and country. But the expense of the war must be borne by the subjects of the crown; and as the Lord will not have any tax-gatherers in his kingdom, but accepts only voluntary contributions, he makes a mark over against the names of those who do nothing, and he will settle with them at his return. He calls  even the contributions  for the gospel, made by those  at  home,  'a  fragrant  odor,  a  sacrifice  acceptable,  well pleasing to God.'  

But we are afraid of doing anything of this sort, lest we should be like  some  other  people,  who  we  think  have  acted  imprudently. Strange, indeed, that when anything has been once abused, it is never again to be used! But I have inadvertently strayed off from my  purpose.  The  manner  in  which  the  brethren  labor  for  the salvation  of  the  world,  is  all  that  comes  within  our  prescribed limits. On this enough has been said. Let the brethren solemnly consider the things that are wanting to give to their meetings that influence  which they  ought  to  exert upon themselves and upon society at large. 

We are susceptible of receiving moral and religious advantages, from  our own  good order  and decorum  in the  congregation, as those who attend our meetings as spectators. And in this instance, as well as sin all the variety of doing good, he that waters others is again  watered  in  return;  for  he  that  blesses  others,  is  always blessed in blessing them. None enjoy the blessings of the gospel more  fully,  than  they  who  are  most  active  and  influential  in blessing others. What happy seasons are those in which we see many turning to the Lord! Now if we would have a perpetual feast, we must be perpetually devoted to the promotion of the happiness of others. We must live for God, as well as live to God. 

In filling up these outlines, other matters still more minute, but, perhaps, equally important, will present themselves to the attention of the brethren. Now we cannot set about these matters too soon. The time has again come, when judgment must begin at the house of God. The people who have long enjoyed the word of the life and the Christian institutions  must soon  come to  a reckoning. They must  give  an  account  of  their  stewardship,  for  the  Lord  has promised to call them to a judgment. An era is just at the door, which will be known as *the Regeneration* for a thousand years to come. The Lord Jesus will judge that adulterous brood, and give them over to the burning flame, who have broken the covenant, and formed alliances with the governments of the earth. Now the cry is heard in our land, 'Come out of her, my people, that you partake  not  of  her  sins,  and  that  you  may  not  receive  of  her plagues.' The Lord Jesus will soon rebuild Jerusalem, and raise up the tabernacle of David which have so long been in ruins. Let the church prepare herself for the return of her Lord, and see that she make herself ready for his appearance.  

7. The Regeneration of the World 

   All the kingdoms of this world shall soon become the kingdoms of our Lord the King. He will hurl all the present potentates from their thrones. He will grind to powder the despotisms, civil and ecclesiastic; and with the blast of his mouth, give them to the four winds  of  heaven.  The  antichristian  power,  whether  it  be  called Papistical, Mahomedan, Pagan, or Atheistic, will as certainly be destroyed,  as  Jesus  reigns  in  heaven.  No  trace  of  them  shall remain. The best government on earth, call it English or American, has  within  it  the  seeds  of  its  own  destruction — carries  in  its constitution a millstone, which will sink it to the bottom of the sea. They acknowledge not that God has set his Christ upon his throne. They will not kiss the Son. Society under their economy is not blessed. The land mourns through the wickedness of those that sit in high places. Ignorance, poverty, and crime abound, because of the  injustice  and  iniquities  of  those  who  guide  the  destinies  of nations. Men that fear not God, and love not his Son, and that regard not the maxims of his government, yet wear the sword, and sway the sceptre in all lands. 

This is wholly adverse to the peace and happiness of the world. Therefore, he will break them in pieces like a potter's vessel, and set up an order of society in which justice, inflexible justice, shall have  uncontrolled  dominion.  Jesus  will  be  universally acknowledged by all the race of living men, and all nations shall do him homage. This state of society will be the consummation of the Christian religion, in all its moral influences and tendencies upon mankind. 

How far this change is to be effected by moral, and how far by physical means, is not the subject of our present inquiry. But the preparation of a people for the coming of the Lord must be the result of the restoration of the ancient gospel and order of things. And come when it may, the day of the regeneration of the world will  be  a  day  as  wonderful  and  terrible  as  was  the  day  of  the deluge, of Sodom's judgment, or of Jerusalem's catastrophe. Who shall stand when the Lord does this?  

But  all  the  regenerations,  physical  and  moral,  individual, congregational, or national, are but types and shadows, or means of preparation for the —   

***Regeneration of the Heavens and the Earth*** 

The Bible begins with the generations of the heavens and the earth; but the Christian revelation ends with the regenerations, or new creation of the heavens and the earth. This the ancient promise of God,  confirmed  to  us  by  the  Christian  Apostles.  The  present elements are to be changed by fire. The old or antediluvian earth, was purified by water; but the present earth is reserved for fire, with all the works of man that are upon it. It shall be converted into a  lake  of  liquid  fire.  But  the  death  in  Christ  will  have  been regenerated in body, before the old earth is regenerated by fire. The bodies of the saints will be as homogeneous with the new earth  and  heavens  as  their  present  bodies  are  with  the  present heavens  and  earth.  God  recreates,  regenerates,  but  annihilates nothing; and, therefore, the present earth is not to be annihilated. The best description we can give of this regeneration, is in the words of one who had a vision of it on the island of Patmos. He describes it as far as it is connected with the New Jerusalem, which is  to  stand  upon  the  new  earth,  under  the  canopy  of  the  new heaven: —  

'And I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the former heaven and the former earth were passed away; and the sea was no more. And I, John, saw the holy city, the New Jerusalem, descending from God out of heaven, prepared like a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  and  he  shall  pitch  his  tent among them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be among them — their God. And he shall wipe away every tear from their eyes; and death shall be no more, nor grief, nor crying; nor shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away.' 

8. A Word to the Moral Regenerators of Any Age ****

   God, our heavenly Father, works by means, as we all confess. His means are wisely adapted to the ends he has in view. His agents are the best agents for the work he has to accomplish. He employs not physical means nor agents, for moral ends and purposes. Nor does he produce physical effects, by moral means and agents. He has been  pleased  to  employ  not  angels,  but  men  in  the  work  of regenerating the world. Men have written, printed, and published the gospel for nearly two thousand years. They have perpetuated it from  generation  to  generation.  They  have  translated  it  from language to language, and carried it from country to country. They have preached it in word and in deed, and thus it has come down to our days. 

During  the  present  administration  of  the  reign  of  Heaven,  no change is to be expected; no new mission is to be originated, no new order of preachers is to be instituted. The King has gone to a far  country;  and  before  his  departure,  he  called  together  his servants, and committed to them the management of his estate till he  return.  He  has  not  yet  come  to  reckon  them.  They  were commanded first to proclaim the doctrine of his reign; then to write it in a book, and to commit it to faithful men, who should be able to teach it correctly to others. By these faithful men the records have been kept; and through their vigilance and industry they have been  guarded  from  corruption,  interpolation,  and  change.  One generation  handed  them  over  to  the  next;  and  if  ignorant  and unfaithful copyists neglected their duty, others more faithful have corrected them; and now we are able to hear the words which Jesus spoke, and to read the very periods penned by the Apostles. 

Thus, whatever the Prophets and the Apostles have achieved since their  death,  has  been  accomplished  by  human  agents  like ourselves. Where men have not carried this intelligence in speech or writing, not one of our race knows God or his anointed Savior. No angel nor Holy Spirit has been sent to the Pagan nations: and God has exerted no power out of his word to enlighten or reclaim savage  nations.  These  indisputable  facts  and  truths  have  much moral meaning, and ought to give a strong impulse to our efforts to regenerate the world. 

The best means of doing this is the object now before us; and this is  one,  the  importance  of  which  cannot  be  easily  exaggerated. There are three ways of proceeding in this case, which now seem to  occupy  a  considerable  share  of  public  attention.  These  are properly called *theorizing, declaiming,* and *preaching;* on each of which we may offer a remark or two in passing. 

The *theorizers* are those who are always speculating upon correct notions, or the true theory of conversion. They are great masters of method, and with some of them it is a ruinous error to place faith before regeneration, or repentance after faith. Heresy, with these, is the derangement of the method, which these have proposed for God to work by in converting the sinner. And the true faith which is connected with salvation, is an apprehension of this theory and acquiescence in it. These are all theorists, heady, or speculative Christians; and with them the whole *scheme* of redemption is a splendid theory. 

Our maxim is, *Theory for the Doctors, and medicine for the sick.* Doctors fatten on theories, but patients die who depend on theory for cure. A few grains of practice is worth a pound of theory. The mason  and  the  carpenter  *build*  the  house  by  *rule;*  but  he  that inhabits it, *lives* by *eating* and *drinking.* No man ever was cured physically, politically, morally, or religiously, by learning a correct theory of his  physical,  political,  moral,  or religious malady. As soon might we expect to heal an ulcer on the liver by a discourse upon that organ, its functions, its diseases, and their cure, as to restore  a  sinner  by  means  of  the  theory  of  faith,  repentance, regeneration, or effectual calling. But on this enough has already been said, and more than is necessary to convince those who can think, and who dare to reason on such themes. 

The  *declaimers*  are  not  those  only  who  eulogize  virtue  and reprobate vice; but that large and respectable class who address themselves to the passions, to the hopes and fears of men. They are those who are so rhetorical upon the joys of heaven, and the terrors of hell:  who horrify, terrify, and  allure by the strength  of their descriptions,  the  flexions  of  their  voices,  the  violence  of  their gestures,  and  their  touching  anecdotes.  Their  hearers  are  either dissolved in tears, or frantic with terror. These talk much about the heart; and, on their theory, if man's heart was extracted, all his religion would be extracted with it. The religion of their converts flows in their blood, and has its foundation in their passions. 

The *preachers,* properly so called, first address themselves to the understanding,  by  a  declaration  or  narrative  of  the  wonderful works of God. They state, illustrate, and prove the great facts of the  gospel;  they  lay  the  whole  record  before  their  hearers;  and when they have testified what God has done, what he has promised and threatened, they exhort their hearers on these premises, and persuade them to obey the gospel, to surrender themselves to the guidance  and  direction  of  the  Son  of  God.  They  address themselves  to  the  whole  man,  his  understanding,  will,  and affections,  and  approach  the  heart  by  taking  the  citadel  of  the understanding. 

The accomplished and wise proclaimer of the word will find it always expedient to address his audience in their proper character; to approach them through their prejudices, and never to find fault with these prepossessions, which are not directly opposed to the import and design of the ministry of reconciliation. He will set before them the models found in the sacred history, which show that the same discourse is not to be preached in every place and to every assembly, even when it is necessary to proclaim the same gospel. Paul's address to the Athenians, Lycaonians, Antiochians, to Felix, the Jailor, and king Agrippa, are full of instruction on the topic. 

Augustine  has  written  a  treatise  on  preaching,  which  Luther proposed to himself as a model; but it is said that Augustine fell as far short of his own precepts, as did any of his contemporaries. We all can with more facility give precepts to others, than conform to them  ourselves.  In  Augustine's  treatise,  which  in  some  respects influenced and formed the style and plan of Luther, and through him all the Protestants, there is much said on the best rhetorical mode "of exhibiting the truth to others;" but it savors more of the art  of  the  schoolmen,  than  of  the  wisdom  of  the  Apostles.  He labors more on the best style and mode of expressing one's self, than on the things to be said. 

Our best precepts in this matter are derived rather from the books of Deuteronomy and Nehemiah, than from any other source out of the New Testament. The book of Deuteronomy may be regarded as a series of sermons or discourses, delivered to the Jews by their great teacher, Moses, rather than as a part of the Jewish history. Two things in this book deserve great attention. The first is the simplicity,  fulness,  and  particularity  of  his  narratives  of  the incidents on the journey through the wilderness; — God's doings and theirs, for the last forty years, are faithfully and intelligibly laid before  them.  The  next  is  the  use  made  of  these  facts;  the conclusions deduced, the arguments drawn, and the exhortations tendered from these facts. For a fair and beautiful specimen of this, let  the  curious  reader  take  up  and  carefully  read  the  first  four chapters of the book of Deuteronomy. The fact and the application, the  argument  and  the  exhortation  after  the  manner  of  Moses, cannot fail to instruct him. 

The writings of the scribes during the captivity, teach us how to address a people that have lost the true meaning of the oracles of God. The readings, expositions, exhortations, and prayers of Ezra and Nehemiah, are full of instruction to Christians in these days of Babylonish  captivity.  To  address  a  people  long  accustomed  to hearing  the  Scriptures,  yet  ignorant  of  them,  and  consequently disobedient, is a matter that requires all the wisdom and prudence which can be acquired from Jewish and Christian records. 

The manner of address, next to the matter of it, is most important. The  weightiest  arguments,  the  most  solemn  appeals,  the  most pathetic expostulations, if not sustained by the gravity, sincerity, and piety of the speaker, will be like water spilled upon the ground. A little levity, a few witticisms, a sarcastic air, a conceited attitude, or a harsh expression, will often neutralize all the excellencies of the  most  scriptural  and  edifying  discourse.  The  great  work  of regenerating men is too solemn, too awfully grave and divine, to allow anything of the sort. Humility, serenity, devotion, and all benevolence in aspect, as well as in language, are essential to a successful proclamation of the great facts of the Living Oracles. He that can smile in his discourse at the follies, need not weep over the  misfortunes,  of  the  ignorant  and  superstitious.  He  that  can, while preaching the gospel, deride and ridicule the errors of his fellow professors, is, for the time being, disqualified to persuade them  to  accept  of  truth,  or  gladly  to  receive  the  message  of salvation. 

Those  preachers  have  been  sadly  mistaken,  who  have  sought popularity  by  the  eccentricities,  and  courted  smiles  rather  than souls; — who,  by  their  anecdotes  and  foolish  jests,  told  with  the Bible  before  them,  have  thought  to  make  themselves  useful  by making themselves ridiculous — and to regenerate men by teaching them how to violate the precepts of the gospel, and to disdain the examples of the Great Teacher and his Apostles. 

It will not do. These are the weapons of this world, and no part of the armor of light. Jesus and his Apostles never sanctioned, by precept  or  example,  such  a  course;  and  it  is  condemned  by  all sensible men, whether Jews or Gentiles, professors or profane.  

In attempting to regenerate men, we must place before them the new  man,  not  the  old  man,  in  the  preacher  as  well  as  in  the discourse; and while we seek out arguments to convince and allure them, we must show them in our speech and behavior, that we believe what we preach. So did the Apostles and Evangelists. They commended themselves to every man's conscience in the sight of Jesus Christ. 

Error must be attacked. It must be opposed by the truth. But it may be asked, whether the darkness may not be more easily dissipated by the introduction of light, than by elaborate discourses upon its nature and attributes. So with moral darkness, or error. To dissipate it most effectually, the easiest and readiest way is to introduce the light of truth. No preacher is obliged to learn all the errors of all ages, that he may be able to oppose them; nor is the congregation enlightened in the knowledge of God by such expositions of error. Present opposing errors may require attention; but, to attack these most  successfully,  it  is  only  necessary  to  enforce  the  opposing truths. 

This  is  a very  grave subject,  and requires very grave  attention. Much  depends  upon  a  rational  and  scriptural  decision  of  the question, *Which is the most effectual way to oppose and destroy error?* To aid us in such an inquiry, it is necessary to examine how the Prophets and Apostles opposed the errors of their times. The world was as full of error in those days as it has ever been since. The idolatries of the Pagan world, and the various doctrines of the sects of philosophers, in and out of the land of Israel, threw as much labor into their hands, as the various heresies of apostate Christendom have thrown into ours. Their general rule was to turn the artillery of light, and to gather into a focus the arrows of day, upon  the  dark  shades  of  any  particular  error.  Their  philosophy was; — The splendors of light most clearly display the blackness of darkness,  and  scatter  it  from  its  presence.  Thus  they  opposed idolatry, superstition, and error of every name. Going forth in the armor of light, as the sun in the morning, the shades of the night retired  from  their  presence,  and  the  cheering  beams  of  day  so gladdened the eyes of their converts, that they loved darkness no more. Let us go and do likewise. 

An  intimate  acquaintance  with  the  Holy  Scriptures  is  the  best apparatus for the work of regenerating men. The best piece I have found in the celebrated treatise of Augustine on preaching is the following: —   

"He, then, who handles and teaches the word of God, should be a defender  of  the  true  faith,  and  a  vanquisher  of  error;  and  in accomplishing this, the object of preaching, he should conciliate the adverse, excite the remiss, and point out to the ignorant their duty and future prospects. When, however, he finds his audience favorably disposed, attentive, and docile, or succeeds in rendering them so, then other things are to be done, as the case may require. If they are to be instructed, then, to make them acquainted with the subject in question, narration must be employed; and to establish what is doubtful, resort must be had to reasoning and evidence. If they are to be moved rather than instructed, then, to arouse them from  stupor  in  putting  their  knowledge  into  practice,  and  bring them to yield full assent to those things which they confess to be true, there will be need of the higher powers of eloquence; it will be  necessary  to  entreat,  reprove,  excite,  restrain,  and  do whatsoever else may prove effectual in moving the heart. 

"All this, indeed, is what most men constantly do, with respect to those  things  which  they  undertake  to  accomplish  by  speaking. Some,  however,  in  their  way  of  doing  it,  are  blunt,  frigid, inelegant;  others,  ingenious,  ornate,  vehement.  Now  he  who engages in the business of which I am treating, must be able to speak  and  dispute  with  wisdom,  even  if  he  cannot  do  so  with eloquence, in order that he may profit his audience; although he will profit them less in this case, than if he could combine wisdom and  eloquence  together.  He  who  abounds  in  eloquence  without wisdom, is certainly so much the more to be avoided, from the very fact that the hearer is delighted with what it is useless to hear, and  thinks  what  is  said  to  be  true,  because  it  is  spoken  with elegance. Nor did his sentiment escape the notice of those among the ancients, who yet regarded it as important to teach the art of rhetoric; they confessed that wisdom without eloquence profited states but very little, but that eloquence without wisdom profited them not at all, and generally proved highly injurious. If, therefore, those who taught the precepts of eloquence, even though ignorant of the true, that is, the celestial wisdom 'which cometh down from the Father of lights,' were compelled by the instigations of truth to make such a confession, and that too in the very books in which their  principles  were  developed;  are  we  not  under  far  higher obligations to acknowledge the same thing, who are the sons and daughters  of  this  heavenly  wisdom?  Now  a  man  speaks  with greater or less wisdom according to the proficiency he has made in the  sacred  Scriptures.  I  do  not  mean  in  reading  them  and committing them to memory, but in rightly understanding them, and diligently searching into their meaning. There are those who read them and yet neglect them — who read them, to remember the words,  but  neglect  to  understand  them.  To  these,  without  any doubt, those persons are to be preferred, who retaining less the words  of  the  Scriptures,  search  after  their  genuine  signification with the inmost feelings of the heart. But better than both is he, who  can  repeat  them  when  he  pleases,  and  at  the  same  time understands them as they ought to be understood."15

Luther's  favorite  maxim  was,  "*Bonus  Textuarius,  Bonus Theologus;*" or, One well acquainted with the Scriptures makes a good theologian. 

There is one thing, above all others, which must never be lost sight of by him, who devotes himself to the work of regeneration. This all-important consideration is, that the end of the object of all his labors is *to impress the moral image of God upon the moral nature of man.* To draw this image upon the heart, to transform the mind of man into the likeness of God in all moral feeling, is the end proposed in the remedial system. The mould into which the mind of man is to be cast is the Apostles' doctrine; or the seal by which this impression is to be made is the testimony of God. The gospel facts are like so many types, which, when scientifically arranged by  an  accomplished  compositor,  make  a  complete  form,  upon which, when the mind of man is placed by the power which God has given to the preacher, every type makes its full impression upon  the  heart.  There  is  written  upon  the  understanding,  and engraved upon the heart, the will, or law, of character of our Father who is in heaven. 

The Apostles were these accomplished compositors, who gave us a *perfect  'form  of  sound  words.*'  Our  instrumentality  consists  in bringing the minds of men to this form, or impressing it upon their hearts. To do this most effectually, the preacher or evangelist must have the word of Christ dwelling in him richly, in all wisdom; and he  must  'study  to  show  himself  an  approved  workman, irreproachable, rightly dividing the word of truth.' He that is most eloquent and wise in the Holy Scriptures, he who has them most at command,  will  have  the  most  power  with  men;  because  being furnished  with  the  words  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  he  has  the  very arguments,  which  the  Spirit  of  God  chooses  to  employ  in quickening the dead in converting sinners. For to the efficacy of the living word not only Paul deposes, but James and Peter also bear ample testimony. 'Of his own will he has begotten us, *by the word  of  truth,*  that  we  might  be  a  kind  of  first  fruits  of  his creatures.'16 'Having been regenerated, not by corruptible seed, but by  incorruptible,  *through  the  word*  of  the  living  God,  which remains."17 To the fruits of his labors, such a preacher with Paul may say, 'To Jesus Christ, through the gospel, I have regenerated, or begotten you.' 

Thus, in the midst of numerous interruptions, we have attempted to lay  before  the  minds  of  our  readers  the  whole  doctrine  of Regeneration, in all its length and breadth, in the hope, that after a more particular attention to its meaning and value, by the blessing of  God,  they  may  devote  themselves  more  successfully  to  this great work; and not only enjoy more of the Holy Spirit themselves, but be more useful in forwarding the moral regeneration of the world. 

To God our Father, through the great Author of the Christian faith, who has preserved us in health in this day of affliction and great distress, be everlasting thanks for the renewing of our minds by the Holy Spirit, and for the hope of the regeneration of our bodies, of the heavens and of the earth, at the appearance of the Almighty Regenerator, who comes to make all things new! Amen. 

1 For Fact, Testimony and Faith, see pp. 109-121.  

2 Num 5:7-8.  

3 Lev 5:16.  

4 Acts 26:20.  

5 Adam Clarke on Gen 42:1-38 :  

6 Acts 19:18-20.  

7 See Family Testament, Note 39, p. 74.  

8 Gen 2:4.  

9 Gen 5:1.  

10 See Num 8:7. — xix. 9, 13, 20, 21. — xxxi. 23.  

11 Ephesians, chap. 5: 26.  

12 It may again be necessary in this fastidious age, to remark, that in this essay, in order to disabuse the public mind on our use and acceptation of the term *regeneration,* we have taken the widest range, which a supreme regard for the 

apostolic style could, in our judgment, allow. While we argue that the phrase *bath  of  regeneration,*  (  Titus  3:5.)  is  equivalent  to  *immersion,*  as  already explained, and as contradistinguished from the *renewing of the Holy Spirit,* of which the immersed believer is a proper subject; we have spoken of the whole process of renovation, not in the strict application of the phrase, Titus 3:5, but rather in the whole latitude of the figure employed by the Apostle. It is not the first act of begetting, nor the last act of being born, but the whole process of conversion alluded to in the figure of *generation,* to which we have directed the  attention  of  our  readers.  For,  as  often  before  stated,  our  opponents deceive themselves and their hearers, by representing us as ascribing to the word  *immersion,*  and  the  act  of  immersion,  all  that  they  call  *regeneration.* While, therefore, we contend that being 'born again,' and being immersed, are, in  the  Apostle's  style,  two  names  for  the  same  action,  we  are  far  from supposing,  or  teaching,  that  in  forming  the  new  man,  there  is  nothing necessary but to be born.  

`  `If any ask, why this matter was not fully developed in our first essays on this subject, our answer is, Because we could not anticipate, that our opponents would  have  so  represented  or  misrepresented  our  views.  Were  a  General asked, why he did not arrange all his troops in the beginning of the action, as he had them arranged when he triumphed over his enemy, he would reply, That the manoeuvres and assaults of the enemy, directed the disposition of his forces.  

`  `Our opponents contend for a regeneration, begun and perfected, before faith or baptism — a spiritual change of mind by the Holy Spirit, antecedent to either knowledge, faith, or repentance, of which infants are as susceptible as adults; and,  therefore,  as  we  contend,  make  the  gospel  of  no  effect.  By  way  of reprisals, they would have their converts to think, that we go for nothing but water, and sarcastically  call  us the advocates of  "water  regeneration." They think there is something more sublime and divine in "spirit regeneration;" and therefore claim the title of orthodox. This calumny has been one occasion of the present essay, and it has occasioned that part of it, which gives the fullest latitude to the term *regeneration,* which analogy gives to the figure used by the Apostle.  But  when  we  speak  in  the  exact  style  of  the  living  oracles  on  this subject, we must represent *being born again,* ( John 3:5,) and *regeneration,* ( Titus 3:5,) as relating to the act of immersion alone. See *Extra Defended,* pp. 24-36.  

13 *August* 1*st.* —  I have just now opened the CincinnaTim. *Baptist Journal* of 26 July, from which I read an approved definition of regeneration. It is orthodox, 

spiritual, physical, mystical, and metaphysical Regeneration. It is quoted from the " STANDARD." Regeneration, in the *Evangelical Standard,* is thus defined: —   

- Is the sinner active in regeneration? Certainly he is. His mind is a thinking 

rational principle, which never ceases to act; and, therefore, when the word *passive* is applied to it, by Old Divines, or by Calvinists, they do not mean that it is *literally* dead, like inert matter, which requires a physical impulse to put it in motion. They only mean to convey the scriptural idea, that the Holy Spirit is the *sole* agent in regeneration, and that the sinner has no more *efficient agency* in accomplishing it, than Lazarus had in becoming alive from the dead. Still they grant that his mind is most active, but unhappily its activity is all *against* the Divine influence; as the Scriptures assure us, unregenerated persons 'do always resist' the strivings of the Spirit. ' *Every* imagination of the thoughts of man's heart is *only* evil continually.' ' There is none that doeth good, no, *not one.*' The sinner, therefore, instead of voluntarily co-operating with the Holy Spirit, does all he can to *resist* his divine influence, and *prevent* his own regeneration, until he is *made* willing by almighty power."  

`  `What a comfortable thing is this theory of regeneration! The sinners to be regenerated when actively striving against the Divine influence. At the moment of  regeneration,  "he  has,"  in  one  sense,  "no  more  efficient  agency  in accomplishing it, than Lazarus had in becoming alive from the dead;" and in another  sense,  he  is  not  passive,  but  "does  all  he  can  to  *resist*  the  Divine influence,  and  *prevent*  his  own  regeneration,  until  he  is  *made*  willing  by almighty power." This is *standard* divinity; and he that preaches this divinity, is a  pious,  regenerated,  Regular  Orthodox  Baptist  Christian  Minister!  Of  how much value on this theory, is all the preaching in Christendom? The Holy Spirit may be busily at work upon some drunken sot, or some vile debauchee, who is as dead as Lazarus on one side, and on the other resisting the Spirit, with all his moral and physical energy, up to the moment that the Almighty arm pierces him to the heart with a sword, and makes him alive by killing him!!!  

`  `The  absurdity  and  licentiousness  of  such  a  view  of  the  great  work  of renovation, we had thought so glaring, that no editor in the West would have had boldness to have published it. This is a proof of the necessity of our present essay, and will explain to the intelligent reader why we have given to the whole process of renovation, the name of regeneration, which properly belongs to the last act.  

14 Matt. 19:28.  

15 From the Biblical  Repository, p. 574. Translated from the Latin by A. O. Taylor, of Andover, Mass.  

16 James 1:18.  17 1 Pe 1:23.  

