# ADDRESS TO BELLIGERENT ALIENS

To him who, through the telescope of faith, surveys your camp, there appears not on the whole map of creation such a motley group, such a heterogeneous and wretched amalgamation of distracted spirits, as are found in actual insurrection and rebellion, in a mad and accursed alliance against the reigning Monarch of creation. In your ranks are found every unclean and hateful spirit on this side the fathomless gulf, the dark and rayless receptacle of fallen and ruined intelligences, who, in endless and fruitless wailings, lament their own follies, and through an incessant night of despair curse themselves and their accomplices in the perpetuation of their eternal suicide. Yes, in your ranks are all who willfully reject the Son of God, and will not have him reign over them; whether they are called decent moralists, honest deists, skeptics, atheists, infidels, speculative Sadducees, boastful Pharisees, supercilious Jews, resentful Samaritans, or idolatrous Gentiles. All ranks and degrees of people in political society — the king and the beggar — the sage philosopher and the uneducated clown — the rich and the poor, who disdain the precepts of the Messiah, unite with you in this unholy alliance against the kingdom of heaven. You may boast of many decent fellow-soldiers in the crusade against Immanuel; many who, when measured by the standards of this political sanctuary, are not found wanting in all the decencies of this present life; but look at the countless crowds of every sort of wretches, down to the filthiest, vilest matricide, who in your community are fighting under your banners — stout-hearted rebels! — united with you in your attempts to dethrone the Lord's Anointed. If you boast of one Marcus Aurelius, you must also fraternize with many a Nero, Domitian, Caligula, and Heliogabalus. If you rejoice in the virtues of one Seneca, you must acknowledge the vices of the ten thousand murderers, robbers, adulterers, drunkards, profane swearers, and lecherous debauchees, who have rejected the counsels of heaven because the precepts of righteousness and life forbade their crimes.

If, then, my friends, (for I now address the most honorable among you,) you boast that you belong to a very large and respectable synagogue; remember, I pray you, that this same synagogue, in which you have your brotherhood, includes everything mean, vile, and wretched, in every land where the name of Jesus has been proclaimed. *What a group!* Have you so much of the reflected light of the gospel shining upon you that it flushes your cheek with the glow of shame when you look along the lines of your alliance and survey the horrible faces, the ragged, tattered, squalid, and filthy wretches, *your companions in arms — members with you in the synagogue of Satan — and confederates against the Prince of Peace!* If you cannot blush at such a spectacle, you are not among those to whom I would offer the pearls of Jesus Christ.

What do you then say? "I am ashamed of such an alliance — of such a brotherhood; and therefore I have joined the Temperance Society — I belong to the Literary Club — and I carry my family regularly to church every Sunday." And do you think, O simpleton! that these human inventions, which only divide the kingdom of Satan into castes, and form within it various private communications, honorable and dishonorable associations, learned and unlearned fraternities, moral and immoral gatherings, change the status of a single son of Adam concerning the Son of God!! Then let Whig and Tory, Masonic and Antimasonic clubs and conclaves — then let every political cabal, for the sake of elevating some demagogue, change the political relations in the state, and make or unmake American citizens as they see fit, regardless of the constitution, law, and established precedents. No, sir; having as many parties in the state as there are days in a month, membership in any one of these does not affect, in the least, the standing of any man as a citizen in relation to the United States or to any foreign power. And similarly, as well as by all that is written in the New Testament, should you join all the benevolent societies on the colorful map of Christendom and fraternize with every brotherhood born *after the will of man,* this would neither change nor destroy your citizenship in the kingdom of Satan — you would still be an alien from the kingdom of the Messiah — a foreigner concerning all its covenanted blessings — and in the unprejudiced judgment of the universe, you would stand counted among its enemies.

In *character,* there are many degrees concerning any and every attribute that enters into its formation; but as for *state,* there are no degrees. In the nature of things, it is impossible. Every person is either married or single, a brother, a master, a citizen, or he is not. Every person is either Christ's or Belial's; there is no middle ground, and therefore no neutral state. Hence the King himself, when on the current battlefield, told his companions to regard every man as his enemy who was not on his side. Among his professed friends, those who deny him through their actions are even counted as enemies.

What a hopeless struggle you are engaged in! Discomfiture, sooner or later, awaits you. Do you have the counsel and strength to oppose the Sovereign of the Universe? Do you think you can thwart the counsels of Infinite Wisdom and overcome Omnipotence? Your master is already a prisoner — your chief is in chains. The fire of eternal vengeance is already kindled for Satan and all his subjects. Mad in his disappointed ambition, and implacable in his hatred against him whom he rebelled against, he only seeks to satisfy his own malice by dragging down with himself the unhappy victims of his seduction into irretrievable ruin. He only seeks to desolate the dominions of God and to ruin forever his fellow creatures. Will you then serve your worst enemy and wage war against your best friend?

But your rebellion can achieve nothing against God. His arm is too strong for all creation. You cannot defeat his counsels nor stop his almighty hand. The earth on which you stand trembles at his rebuke; the foundations of the hills and mountains are shaken at his presence. You are fighting against yourselves. God's detestation of your course arises not from any fear that you can injure him; but because you are destroying yourselves. Every triumph that your uncontrolled desires and passions gain over the admonitions of reason and conscience only plunges you into deeper misery, prepares you for destruction, and makes it inevitable for the good order and happiness of the universe that you should suffer an 'everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory of his power.'

What, then, blinds you to choose death rather than life, and prefer destruction to salvation? "I am not sure that the gospel is true; I love my companions, and cannot see any wrong in satisfying those passions and appetites that my creator has placed within my nature."

You admit there is a God, your Creator; but you doubt whether the gospel is true! What an abuse of reason and evidence! Can you infer from any premises in your possession that **he**, whose creation man is, who has shown to the eye and ear of man so much wisdom, power, and goodness, in all his grand designs already accomplished, and those daily accomplished, in the heavens and on earth, teaching humans to sustain the present life, to anticipate the future, and to provide for it, has never clearly addressed him on a subject of vastly more importance — his own ultimate destiny! That God should have been so diligent to elevate man in nature — to furnish him with such an organization — to bestow on him reason and speech — remarkably qualifying him to acquire and communicate instruction on all things necessary for his present animal enjoyment; and, at the same time, to have never communicated to him anything concerning his intellectual nature — never to have addressed him on the themes which, as a rational being, he must most fervently desire to know; to have done everything for his body and the present — and nothing for his mind or for the future — is, to say the least, the most improbable notion that even the most romantic imagination can entertain.

That the Creator *could not* enlighten him on these topics is wholly inadmissible. That he could, and *would not,* is directly contrary to every analogy in creation — contradictory to every proof we have of his benevolence, an inexplicable exception to the entire order of his government: for he has provided objects for every sense — objects for every intellectual power — objects for every affection, honorable passion, appetite, and propensity in our constitution; but, on your hypothesis, he has only failed in that which is infinitely more dear to us, more consonant to our entire rational nature, and most essential to our happiness!! It is utterly unreasonable.

But the folly of your skepticism is even more glaring when we open the book of the gospel of salvation. In the history of Jesus, you have the fulfillment of a thousand predictions made by numerous Prophets 1500 years before he was born. These recorded prophecies were in the possession of his and our most bitter enemies when he appeared, and are still extant in their hands. How can you explain these? All antiquity confirms the existence of Jesus of Nazareth during the times of Augustus and Tiberius Caesar. No contemporary opponent denied his miracles: they explained them away, but did not question the wonderful works which he performed. His character was the only perfect and unexceptionable one the world has ever seen, either in print or in real life; and yet you imagine him to have been the greatest liar and most infamous imposter that ever lived. You must admit him to have been the teacher of everything moral, pure, and godlike — to have led the most exemplary life — to have spent his entire life doing good — while, to support your skepticism, you must imagine him to have been the greatest deceiver and most blasphemous pretender the world has ever known! Truly, you are fond of paradox!

His Apostles, too, for the sake of being considered the offscourings of the world, and the filth of all society — for the sake of poverty, scorn, abuse, imprisonment, and martyrdom, you imagine traveled the earth teaching virtue and holiness — denouncing every kind of vice and immorality, while telling the most shameless lies, and that too about matters of obvious fact, about which no man with eyes and ears could be mistaken! How great your credulity! How weak your faith!

And to conclude the matter, you admit that in the most enlightened age, and among the most argumentative and discerning population, both Jewish, Roman, and Greek, in Jerusalem itself, the very stage of the crucifixion of Christ, and in all Judea and Samaria, and in all the great towns and cities of the entire ancient Roman Empire, Eastern and Western, these rude and uncultivated Galileans did in fact succeed in persuading hundreds of thousands of people, of all ranks, sexes, ages, and intellects, to renounce their former opinions and practices — to face proscription, confiscation of goods, banishment, and even death itself in numerous instances, through faith in their testimony, while everything was fresh, and when the detection of any fiction or fraud was most straightforward!

Now, if it were possible to portray your folly in an even more inexcusable light, I would ask you to show what there is in the gospel that is not infinitely worth receiving from God. And where under the canopy of the skies, in any country, language, or age of time, is there anything that confers greater honor on man, or proposes to him anything more worthy of his acceptance, than the gospel?

Can there have been a more acceptable model proposed, after which to shape man, than that after which he was originally created? When he was seduced and fell from God, could there have been a more honorable person to effect his reconciliation to God than his only begotten and well-beloved Son? And could there even be imagined a more delightful destiny allotted to man than an immortality of bliss in the palace of this vast universe, in the presence of his Father and his God forever and ever? Now, with all these premises, will you object to this religion because it requires a man to be pure and holy in order to enjoy eternal salvation? Then lay your hand upon your face, and blush, and be ashamed forever!

But you say you love your companions! And who are they? Your fellow-rebels, foolish and misguided like yourselves. The drunkard, the thief, the murderer, love their companions — their partners in crime. Conspirators and partisans in any endeavor, kindred spirits in guilty and daring enterprises, confirm each other in their evil schemes, whether from mutual interest or from some hateful affinity in evil dispositions, coalesce and band together in malicious acts. A Catiline, a Jugurtha, a Robespierre had their confederates. The rakes, the libertines, and the freebooters of every kind form their own fraternities and have some sort of affinity for their companions. And how does your attachment to your companions differ from theirs? A congeniality of disposition, a similarity of likes and dislikes, all springing from your love of the world, and your disdain of the authority of the Messiah. And will not a change of circumstances convert your affections into hatred? Sooner or later, if you do not repent and turn to God, you who are allied in the friendships of this world, those friendships rooted in the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of the eye, and the pride of life, will not only become enemies but mutual tormentors of one another. Your warmest friends in your opposition to the Son of God will become witnesses against you and fuel the flames that will consume you forever. Break off, then, every friendship, alliance, and covenant that you have formed with those who despise the grace of God and condemn the Savior of the world, and form an everlasting covenant with the people of God that shall never be forgotten. Then, indeed, you may love your companions with all your heart, and indulge to the fullest every sympathy and social feeling of your nature. Then may you embrace, in all the fervor of fraternal love, those kindred spirits who, with you, have vowed eternal allegiance to the gracious and rightful Sovereign of all the nations of the redeemed, in heaven and on earth. Such companions are worth possessing, and their friendship is worth cultivating and preserving throughout the journey of life; for it will be renewed beyond the Jordan, and flourish with increasing delight through the endless ages of eternity.

But you have said that the gratification of all the impulses and propensities of your nature must be innocent because they are the creation of God, and were sown within the embryo of your physical constitution. If under the control of the light and reason, which God commanded your affections and appetites to follow, your reasoning would be sound and safe; but if they have usurped tyranny over your judgment and captivated your reason, they are not to be gratified. They are like successful rebels that have dethroned their sovereign; and, because by violence and fraud in possession of the throne, they claim a divine right to wield the scepter over their dethroned Prince. Such is the meaning of the plea you urge in favor of your rebellious affections. When man rebelled against his Creator, the beasts of the field, till then under his dominion, rebelled against him; and all his passions, affections, and propensities partook of the general disorder — of that wild and licentious anarchy that followed man's disobedience. And have you not in your daily observation — nay, have you not in your own experience, irrefutable evidence that the uncontrolled indulgence of even instinctive appetites, as well as the gratification of excessive passions and affections, necessarily leads to the destruction of the physical constitution of man? Is it not the control of reason, the exercise of discretion in the license of every animal indulgence, that is essential to the health and life of man? Then why seek an exemption from the universal law of human existence, in favor of that demoralizing course of indulgence, which you would like to call innocent in morals, though in physics plainly destructive to animal organization?

When reconciled to God through the gospel, the peace of God which surpasses understanding reigning in the heart, everything is orderly and harmonious within. Then, under the control of enlightened and sanctified reason, all the passions, appetites, and instincts of our nature, like the planets around the sun, move in their respective orbits in perfect harmony, preserving a perfect balance within all the principles and powers of human action. Pleasures without alloy are then felt and enjoyed from a thousand sources, from which, in the tumult and disorder of rebellion, every transgressor is barred. It is then discovered that there is not a superfluous passion, affection, nor appetite in man — not one that does not add something to his enjoyment — not one that cannot be made an instrument of righteousness, a means of doing good to others, as well as of enjoying good ourselves. Why not, then, lay down the weapons of your rebellion, and be at peace with God, with your fellow creatures, and with yourselves?

"Admitting, then, that the gospel is true — that in my present state and standing I am an alien from the kingdom of heaven, and that I wish to become a citizen, where shall I find this kingdom of heaven, and how shall I be made a citizen thereof?" Well, indeed, may you accept the gospel to be true, both on account of what it is in itself, and the evidence that supports it. Only suppose it is false — extinguish all the light it sheds on the human race — make void all its promises — annul all its hopes — eradicate from the human heart all the motives it imparts — and what remains to explain the universe, develop the moral character of God, dissipate the gloom that envelops the eternal night of man’s destiny, solace and cheer him during the incessant struggle of life, soothe the bed of affliction and death, and countervail the inward dread and horror of falling into nothing — of being forever lost in the chaotic wreck of nature — of sinking down into the grave, the food of worms, the prey of eternal death?

It is like annihilating the sun in the heavens. An eternal night ensues. There is no beauty, form, nor grace in creation. The universe is in ruins. The world without the Bible is a universe without a sun. The Atheist is but an atom of matter in motion, belonging to no system, answerable to none, without a destiny, without an object to live or die for. He boasts that there is no one to punish him: but then there is no one to assist him — no one to reward him. He has no Father, proprietor, or ruler — no filial affection, no sense of obligation, no gratitude, no comfort in reflection, no joy in anticipation. If he cannot be blamed, he cannot be praised — if he cannot be praised, he cannot be honored — and man without honor is more wretched than the beasts that perish. Unenviable mortal!

What an abortion is the system of nature, if man does not live again! It is a creation for the sake of destruction. It is an infinite series of designs, ending in nothing. It is a universe of blanks, without a single prize. It cannot be. The Bible is necessary for the interpretation of nature. It is the only commentary on nature — on providence — on man. Man without it, and without the hope of immortality, has nothing to inspire him into action. He is a savage, a Hottentot, a cannibal, a worm. You are compelled, then, to admit that the gospel is true unless you put out the eye of reason and refuse to hear the voice of Nature.

But is it not a happy necessity that compels your belief in God and in his Son, the renovator of the Universe? It opens to you all the mysteries of creation, the secrets of the temple of nature, and introduces you to the fountain of being and bliss. It inspires you with motives of high and noble enterprise, stimulates you to manly action, and points out a prize worthy of the best efforts of body, soul, and spirit. Is it not, then, 'a credible saying, and worthy of universal acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save sinners, even the chief?'

But you ask, 'Where will the kingdom of heaven be found, and how may you be made a citizen of it?' The Prophets and Apostles must be your guides in deciding these great questions. Moses in the law, all the Prophets, and all the Apostles point you to the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world — the Apostle of the Father Almighty — the divinely constituted Chief of the kingdom of heaven. He has submitted his claims to your examination — he has invited you to test all his pretensions — and to the humble and docile, he has offered all the necessary assistance in deciding upon his person and mission.

His character is so familiar, so approachable, so full of all grace and goodness, that all may come to him. The halt, the maimed, the deaf, the mute, the blind, find in him a friend and healer indeed. None implore his aid in vain. His ears are always open to the tale of woe. His eyes stream with sympathy upon every object of distress. He invites all the wretched and repulses none who seek relief. He rebukes only the proud and warmly receives and blesses the humble. He invites and implores the weary, the heavy laden, the brokenhearted, the oppressed, and all the sons of want and misfortune to come to him, and offers relief to all.

In his official dignity, he presides over the universe. He is the High Priest of God and the Prophet and Messenger of Peace. He has the key of David; he opens and shuts the Paradise of God. He is the only Sovereign and has the power to grant remission of all sins to all who obey him.

To receive him in his personal glory, official dignity, and supremacy, as the Messiah of God, the only begotten of the Father — to know him in his true and proper character, is the only prerequisite for obedience to faith. He who thus credits him is not far from the kingdom of heaven. To accept him as your Prophet, your High Priest, and your King; to submit to him in these relations, being immersed into his death, will translate you into the kingdom of heaven. Why not then gladly and immediately yield him the admiration of your understanding and the homage of your heart? Why not now enter into the possession of all the riches, fullness, and excellence of the kingdom? He commands *all* men to repent — he urges every sinner whom he addresses in his word, to receive pardon and eternal life as a gracious gift.

Can you doubt his power to save, instruct, and sanctify you for heaven? Can you doubt his condescending mercy and compassion? Will not he that pitied the blind Bartimaeus, that consoled the widow of Nain, that wept with Mary and Martha at the grave of Lazarus, that heard the plea of the Syrophoenician woman, that healed the pleading leper, that cared for the starving multitudes, that looked with pity (even in the agonies of the cross) upon a beseeching thief, have compassion for you, and every returning prodigal who seeks mercy at the gate of his kingdom?

Is there anyone in the universe whom you can believe with more assurance, than the Faithful and True Witness, who, in the presence of Pontius Pilate, witnessed a good confession at the risk of his life? Is there any person in heaven, on earth, or under the earth, more worthy of your confidence than the sinner's friend — than he who, always, and in all circumstances, bore testimony to the truth? When did he ever violate his word or allow his promise to fail? Who ever repented of their confidence in Jesus or of relying solely upon his word? Who ever was put to shame because of faith in him?

Who can offer such inducements to obedience by his authority as the Savior of the world? Who has such power to bless? He has all authority in heaven and on earth. He has power to forgive sins, to raise the dead, to bestow immortality and eternal life, and to judge the living and the dead. And has he not tendered a share of his official authority to everyone who submits to his government, and who, through him, is reconciled to God? If he has wisdom and divine power, has he not pledged these to the relief, guidance, and benefit of his people? Who can harm them under his protection — condemn whom he justifies — accuse whom he pardons — or snatch from his hands those who turn to his mercy?

Was there ever love like his love — compassion like his compassion — or condescension like his condescension! Who ever could — who ever did humble himself like the Son of God? On whose cheek have ever flowed tears of purer sympathy for human suffering than those he shed? Whose heart ever moved with such compassion, as that which melted his heart in tender mercies for the afflicted sons and daughters of men? Who ever for his friends endured such contradiction of sinners against himself; submitted to such indignities; sustained such accumulated sorrows and grief; suffered such agonies of mind and body; as those which he endured in giving his life as an offering for his enemies? Forsaken by his God, abandoned by his friends, deserted by every support, surrounded by the fiercest enemies, the most implacable foes, whose hearts were harder than adamant, insulting the very pains they inflicted, he expired on the accursed tree! The heavens blushed at the sight — the sun hid its face — the earth trembled — the rocks split — the veil of the temple was torn from top to bottom — and graves opened. All nature stood horror-stricken when Roman soldiers, urged by bloodthirsty priests, nailed him to the cross — when the chief priests, scribes, and elders in derision said, 'He saved others; cannot he save himself?' The person who perceives not, who feels not the eloquence of his love consummated in his death — the tenderness of his pleas and expostulations, is beyond reason — is not to be moved by human power. Will you not, then, honor your reason by honoring the Son of God — by yielding your understanding, your wills, your affections, to the teachings of the Good Spirit — to the guidance of his love? Only then can you feel secure, safe, and happy.

Need you be reminded how much you owe him for his long-suffering patience already — for his benevolence in all the gifts and blessings of his providence bestowed upon you? How many days and nights has he guarded, sustained, and helped you? Has he not saved you from ten thousand dangers — from the pestilence that walks in darkness, and from destruction that wastes at noon? Who can tell but he has extended your unprofitable existence to this very hour, that you might now repent of all your sins, turn to God with your whole heart, be baptized for the remission of your past transgressions, be adopted into the family of God, and yet receive an inheritance among the sanctified? Arise, then, in the strength of Israel's God — accept salvation at his hands — enter into his kingdom, and be forever blessed. You will not, you cannot repent of such a step, such a noble surrender of yourself while life continues; at the hour of death, on the day of judgment, nor throughout the endless succession of ages in eternity. *Today*, then, hear his voice: tomorrow may be forever too late! All things are ready — Come. — Saints on earth, and angels in heaven — apostles, prophets, and martyrs will rejoice over you — and you will rejoice with them forever and ever. Amen!