# Objections

We will state and examine some objections that have already been partially addressed; however, because they are the most common, or may become common, we will provide a formal statement and a formal refutation.

**Objection 1. — "To make the attainment and enjoyment of *present salvation*, pardon, justification, sanctification, reconciliation, and adoption dependent upon the availability of water is beneath the dignity and character of a salvation from God."**

Making the attainment and enjoyment of present salvation, pardon, etc., dependent upon the availability of faith or the knowledge of the blood of Jesus Christ is equally objectionable; for what is faith but the belief in testimony? Or what is it in the most popular sense but something created in the heart, a combination of knowledge and feeling, of agreement and consent? Are not both blood and faith less accessible to people than water? Is there not more water than faith, or than candidates for immersion? Is there not as much power, wisdom, and goodness of God in creating water as in creating air, words, letters, faith, etc.? Is not water more universal than language, words, books, preachers, faith, etc.? This objection applies as much to any means of salvation as to another; indeed, it applies to all means of salvation. Whenever a situation arises with much faith and little water, or with little faith and no water, we will counter it with arguments other than these.

**Objection 2. — "It makes void the value, excellence, and importance of both faith and grace."**

By no means. If someone says, with Paul, that we are justified by faith, does it follow that grace is made void? Or, if one says we are justified by grace, does it make the blood of Christ ineffective? Or, if, with Paul, someone says we are justified by his blood, does it render faith, repentance, and grace ineffective? No, indeed, this gives faith its proper place and due value. It makes it the principle of action. It brings us to the water, to Christ, and to heaven. *But it is a principle of action only.* It was not Abel's faith in his head or heart, but Abel's faith at *the altar* that gained such reputation. It was not Enoch's faith in principle, but Enoch's faith in his *walk with* God that translated him to heaven. It was not Noah's faith in God's promise and warning, but his faith demonstrated in *building an ark* that saved himself and his family from the flood and made him an heir of a new world, an heir of righteousness. It was not Abraham's faith in God's call, but his *going out* in obedience to that call that first distinguished him as a pilgrim and began his reputation. It was not faith in God's promise that Jericho would fall, but that faith carried out in the *blowing of rams' horns* that brought its walls down, etc. It is not our faith in God's promise of forgiveness, but our *going down* into the water that obtains the forgiveness of sins. But anyone can see why faith is so praised and valued. Because, without it, Abel would not have offered more sacrifices than Cain; Enoch would not have walked with God; Noah would not have built an ark; Abraham would not have left Ur of the Chaldees, nor offered his son on the altar. Without it, Israel would not have passed through the wilderness, nor crossed the Jordan; and without it, no one receives the forgiveness of their sins in immersion. And, again, we remind the reader that when he talks about being saved by faith, he should keep in mind that grace is not overlooked; nor is blood, nor water, nor reformation discarded.

We enter the kingdom of nature by being born of the flesh. We enter the kingdom of heaven, or come under the reign of Jesus Christ in this life, by being born of water and the Spirit. We enter the kingdom of eternal glory by being born again from the earth, and not by faith, nor the first regeneration. Not by faith, nor baptism; but by being counted worthy of the resurrection of the just. "I was hungry, and you fed me." Not because you believed, or were born of water; but because "I was hungry, and you fed me," etc.

There are three births, three kingdoms, and three salvations. One from the womb of our first mother, one from the water, and one from the grave. We enter a new world at, and not before, each birth. The present animal life at the first birth; the spiritual, or the life of God in our souls, at the second birth; and eternal life in the presence of God at the third birth. And anyone who dreams of entering the second kingdom, or coming under the dominion of Jesus, without the second birth, may, to complete his error, dream of entering the kingdom of glory without a resurrection from the dead.

Grace precedes all these births — shines in all the kingdoms; but will be glorified in the third. Sense is the principle of action in the first kingdom; faith in the second; and spiritual sight in the third. The first salvation is that of the body from the dangers and ills of life, and God is thus "the Savior of all men." The second salvation is that of the soul from sin. The third is that of both soul and body united, delivered from moral and natural corruption, and introduced into the presence of God, when God shall be all in all.

**Objection 3. — "It is so uncharitable to the Paidobaptists!"**

And how uncharitable are the Paidobaptists to the Jews, Muslims, and Pagans!! Will they promise present salvation from the guilt, pollution, and dominion of sin, with the well-grounded hope of heaven, to Jews, Muslims, Pagans, or even Roman Catholics? Or will the Roman Catholics do the same for them!! How uncharitable are those who cry "uncharitable" to us! Infants, the mentally disabled, the deaf, and the mute, innocent Pagans wherever they can be found, along with all the pious Paidobaptists, we commend to the mercy of God. But those among them who willfully *despise* this salvation, and who, having the opportunity to be immersed for the forgiveness of their sins, willfully *despise* or refuse, we have as little hope for them as they have for all who refuse salvation *on their own terms of the gospel*. While they criticize us for placing a scriptural and natural emphasis on immersion, do we not see that they place as great, though an unscriptural and irrational emphasis, on their baptism or sprinkling; so much so that they give it *without faith*, even to infants, as soon as they are born of the flesh?

**Objection 4. — "But do not many of them enjoy the present salvation of God?"**

How far they may be happy in the peace of God and the hope of heaven, I cannot say. And we know enough about human nature to say that he who *imagines* himself pardoned will feel as happy as he who is truly so. But one thing we do know: that none can *rationally* and with *certainty* enjoy the peace of God and the hope of heaven except those who intelligently and in full faith are born of water, or immersed for the forgiveness of their sins. And since the testimony of God, and not conceit, imagination, or our reasoning about what passes in our minds, is the basis of our certainty, we see and feel that we have an assurance that they cannot have. And we have this advantage over them; we once stood on their ground, but they have not stood on our ground, nor felt our assurance. Moreover, the experience of the first converts shows the difference between their immersion and the immersion, or sprinklings, of modern gospels.

**Objection 5. — "This has been so long concealed from the people, and so recently brought to our attention, that we cannot accept it."**

This objection would have made every attempt at reformation, or enlightenment of the mind, or change in the condition and enjoyment of society, ineffective. Besides, do not the experiences of all the religious — the observations of the intelligent — the practical results of all creeds, reformations, and improvements — and the expectations and longings of society warrant the conclusion that either some new revelation or some new development of the revelation of God must be made before the hopes and expectations of all true Christians can be realized, or Christianity can save and reform the nations of this world? We want the old gospel back, sustained by the ancient order of things: and this alone, by the blessing of the Divine Spirit, is all that we need or can expect to reform and save the world. And if this gospel, as proclaimed and enforced on Pentecost, cannot do this, vain are the hopes, and disappointed must be the expectations of the so-called Christian world.
