# 3. God

"**I am that** **I am**." "I lift up my hand to heaven and say, *I live for ever.*" "The *everlasting God,* the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth, fainteth not, neither is weary; there is no searching of his *understanding.*"  "His  understanding  is  infinite."  "Do  not  I  *fill* heaven and earth, saith the Lord?" "For thus saith the *high* and *lofty* one that *inhabiteth eternity,* whose name is *Holy,* I dwell in the high and holy place; with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the contrite ones." "I beseech thee, show me thy *glory,* and he said I will make all my goodness pass before thee; and I will proclaim the name of the Lord before thee; and will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and will show mercy on whom I will show  mercy."  "And  the  Lord  passed  by  before  him [1]  and proclaimed, The Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering,  abundant  in  goodness  and  truth,  keeping  mercy  for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression, and sin, and that by no means aquits the guilty, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, unto the third and to the fourth generation" — "and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments." "O Lord God of Israel, who dwellest between the cherubims, thou art the God, even  *thou  alone,*  thou  hast  made  heaven  and  earth.  Hear,  O Israel — Jehovah our Aleim is one Jehovah [2] — the Lord our God is one Lord." "Holy, holy, holy, Lord God Almighty, which wast, and art, and art to come." "Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou king of saints." "Who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy name, for thou only art holy," "He is the Rock, his work is perfect; for all his ways are judgment; a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he." "Glorious in holiness, fearful in praise, doing wonders." 

Such are a few — a specimen of the Divine declarations concerning himself; repeated and re-echoed by the purest and most intellectual beings in heaven and earth. It is from his word and his works we learn the being and perfections of God. As we form a character of man from what he says and what he does, so learn we the Divine character.  "The  heavens  declare  his  glory,  and  the  firmament showeth forth his handy work: day unto day uttereth speech, and night unto night showeth knowledge." Creation reveals the power, the wisdom, and the goodness of God. Providence proclaims also his justice, truth, and holiness. Redemption develops his mercy, condescension, and love; and all these are again characterized by infinity, eternity, immutability. Nature, then, attests and displays the knowledge, wisdom, power, and goodness of God. The law and the  providence  of  God  especially  declare  his  justice,  truth,  and holiness — while the gospel unfolds his mercy, condescension, and love;  and  all  these  proclaim  that  God  is  infinite,  eternal,  and immutable. God appears before the universe of intellectuals, in the threefold  attitude  of  Creator,  Lawgiver,  and  Redeemer;  and although  each  of  these  involves  and  reveals  many  of  his excellencies, still in each department three are most conspicuous. As  Creator,  knowledge,  wisdom,  power,  and  goodness;  as Lawgiver,  justice,  truth,  and  holiness;  as  Redeemer,  mercy, condescension, and love. In each and all of which departments, he is infinite, immutable, and eternal. 

But the Scriptures speak of his divinity or godhead, as well as of the  unity,  spirituality,  and  eternity  of  his  being.  We  have  not, indeed, much said upon this incomprehensible theme; for — who by searching can find out God, or know the Almighty to perfection? The knowledge of him  is  high as heaven, what  canst  thou  do? deeper than hell, what canst thou know? The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and broader than the sea. 

Paul and Peter indeed speak of the divine nature in the abstract, or of the divinity or godhead. These are the most abstract terms found in the Bible. Eternity and divinity are however equally abstract and almost equally rare in holy writ. Still, they are necessarily found in the divine volume; because we must abstract *nature* from *person* before  we  can  understand  the  remedial  system.  For  the  divine nature  may  be  communicated  or  imparted  in  some  sense;  and indeed while it is essentially and necessarily singular, it is certainly plural in its personal manifestations. Hence we have the Father, Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  equally  divine,  though  personally  distinct from each other. We have in fact, but one God, one Lord, one Holy Spirit;  yet  these  are  equally  possessed  of  one  and  of  the  same divine nature. 

Some conceive of God as mathematical unit; and as a thing cannot be both mathematically singular and plural, one and three, at the same time and in the same sense, they deny the true and proper divinity of the Son of God and of the Spirit of God. But it would seem to us, that they reason not in harmony with the sacred style of inspiration.  But  why  should  we  imagine  that  there  cannot  be  a plurality of personal manifestations in the divine nature any more than in the angelic or human, especially as man was created in the image of God? 

The *relations* in human plurality are indeed limited to *three.* For while all the human nature was at one time originally and wholly in  the  person  of  Adam,  it  was  afterwards  found  equally  in  the person of Eve — and again in the person of their first born. Now as to its derivation and mode of existence, it was diverse in the three. In Adam it was underived as respected human nature, in Eve it was derived from Adam, and in Cain it was again derived from Adam and  Eve.  Here  the  matter  ends;  for  while  Eve  proceeded  from Adam in one mode, and Cain proceeded from Adam and Eve in another, all the residue of human nature is participated without any new relation or mode of impartation. While, then, our nature is plural as to its participation, it is limited to three relations or modes of existence. Now as man was made in the image of God, we must conceive  of  him  as  having  plurality,  relation,  and  society  in himself — though far be it from us to suppose that the divine nature either is, or can be fairly or fully exhibited by any resemblance or illustration drawn from angel or from man, or from any created thing. Still, there is a resemblance between God and the sun that shines  upon  us — between  God  and  an  angel — between  God  and man; and even in the mode of his existence, and in the varieties of relation and personal manifestation, there is so much resemblance as to peremptorily forbid all dogmatism as to what is, or is not, compatible with the unity, spirituality, and immutability of God. But  of  this  more  fully  and  intelligibly  when  we  shall  have examined the record concerning the **word** and the **spirit** of God. 

- 1: Moses.
- 2: So reads the Hebrew. Deut. 6:4
