# 6. Man as He Was

The original man was the rational and moral culmination of the earthly system. Naturally, or as he came from God's hand, he was the perfection of all earthly creations and institutions. In the elements of his constitution, he was partly celestial and partly terrestrial, made of earthly material in his body, but possessing a spiritual intelligence and a divine life. Created to know and enjoy his Creator, and to have communion with all that is divine, spiritual, and material in the whole universe, he was open to an almost limitless variety of joys.

And God said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness, and let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and the birds of the air, and over the livestock, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth. So God created man in his own image; in the image of God he created him; male and female he created them." Gen 1:26-27. Man, then, was a companion of his Father and Creator, capable of admiring, adoring, and enjoying God. Having created the earth for him, God was fully glorified in all his earthly works when they made man happy, grateful, and thankful to himself. Thus, man, in his natural state, was not merely an animal, but an intellectual, moral, pure, and holy being.

His position or state in this creation was that of a *landlord*. The earth is indeed the Lord's; but He gave it to man on a very easy and generous lease; thus, it became his property. He was, therefore, a free and responsible agent, capable of managing his estate and paying his rent; and consequently, he was open to virtue and vice, happiness and misery. In order to have freedom, virtue, and happiness, it was necessary to place him under a law; for where there is no law, there can be no liberty, virtue, or happiness. The law became a test of his character, a guarantee of his continued enjoyment of the life and property which God had leased to him on the condition of his obedience to that command.

To ensure that the temptation to disobedience was weak and the motive for obedience strong, simple, and pure, the command given here was straightforward, positive, and clear. It could not be a moral command, as other reasons besides simple submission to the will of his Lord and King could have influenced him and prevented the display of pure loyalty by which his character was to be tested and his future fortune determined. It was, therefore, a positive law. The requirement was so minimal that it posed the least conceivable restraint on freedom of thought and action; yet it was the most infallible test of his loyalty. The Adamic constitution was thus excellently designed and suited for happiness. It placed only one restriction on universal liberty, and that at such a distance that the circle of his free and unrestrained movements was within a single step of the last outpost of all intellectual, moral, and sensory enjoyment. The whole earth was his to use, with only one single fruit excluded. Truly, God was supremely good and kind to man in his unique condition and state. "You made him a little lower than the angels and crowned him with glory and honor. You made him to have dominion over the works of your hands; you have put all things under his feet: all sheep and oxen, yes, and the beasts of the field, the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea, and whatever passes through the paths of the sea. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is your name in all the earth!" Psalm 8:5-9.