# 13: The Lordship of the Messiah

We are seeking to understand *the things done for us* in the Christian system. "Christ, our Passover, has been sacrificed for us." As such, "not a bone was broken." Yet, "he died for us." In the second place, he has become our *prophet,* as well as our *priest,* and has declared to us the will of God; the entire will of God concerning us. He is our *light,* as well as our *sin offering.* But in the third place, he has been made *Lord* for us. To make Christ Lord *for* us, as well as *over* us — was the last act of the sublime drama of humanity's redemption from sin. The final revelation of the mystery of Christ, which Peter proclaimed on the day of Pentecost, was, "Let all the house of Israel know that God has made that same Jesus, whom you crucified, both **Lord** and **Christ**." To make him Lord for us was to grant him *universal authority,* so that he might have the power to give eternal life to all his people. Jesus, in one of his prayers, anticipating this authority, says, "You have given him *power over all flesh* that he might give eternal life to as many as you have given him." But after his resurrection from the dead and ascension into heaven, he was crowned Lord of angels, as well as Lord of men; and therefore he said, "All authority," or lordship, "in heaven and on earth has been given to me." He is now the **Lord of hosts**: legions of angels, the armies of the skies, are at his command: — for what purpose? So that he might be able to do all for us that our condition requires. It was *for us* he became a Prophet, *for us* he became a Priest, *for us* he has been made Lord of hosts, King of the universe, Judge, and Avenger of all. He is Lord of life, Lord of the Spirit, Lord of all.

We need sacrifice — and therefore we need a priest. We need a Leader, a Luminary, a Sun of Righteousness; and we seek one who can always help us in our time of need, when we wrestle not with flesh and blood, but with the rulers of the darkness of this world; with wicked spirits residing in the air. In Jesus himself, during one of his trials, he needed an angel to minister to him, and we need it even more. Three things have been done for us: a sin offering has been presented; a lamp of life has been given into our hands; and all the active powers and energies in the vast universe are placed at the command of our King whenever we need them. These are things already accomplished. Hence, the Holy Spirit, and all the angels of heaven, are now at the disposal of our Savior: for in him all the promises of God are fulfilled; all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and all the fullness of the Deity, reside completely and truly in him. All these things, it is true, might be encompassed in one gift — the gift of Jesus as our Mediator; our Prophet, Priest, and King. Still, it is important to regard the things done for us, separately and distinctly in the Christian system.

Other things are promised *to be done* for us: but these are the things already accomplished for us, and before we speak of the things yet to be done for us, and done in us, we shall briefly consider the things to be done by us, before anything more can be done for us or done in us.