# 19. Christians are Persons Pardoned, Justified, Sanctified, Adopted, and Saved

While clarifying the most important terms and phrases in the Christian system for a clearer and more comprehensive understanding, it is also important to look at other attributes of a genuine Christian. The five terms at the beginning of this chapter all reflect his *state*; and do not include any attributes of his *character*.

These attributes are various aspects of a new state in relation to an old one; they represent the gospel as changing mankind's position in the universe in all the ways that sin affected him. Was he guilty, condemned, unholy, alien, and lost in Adam the first? Then in Adam the second, he is in the opposite state;—he is pardoned where he was guilty—justified where he was condemned—sanctified where he was unholy—adopted where he was alien—and saved where he was lost. Sin, then, condemns, pollutes, alienates, and destroys those it affects. Grace justifies, sanctifies, adopts, and saves individuals in relation to these issues. Pardon relates to guilt; justification, to condemnation; sanctification, to pollution; adoption, to alienation; and salvation, to destruction. Those *out of Christ* are, therefore, in their sins, condemned, unholy, alien, and lost; while those *in Christ* are pardoned, justified, sanctified, adopted into the family of God, and saved.

In earlier dispensations, as well as in the present, two things remain unchangeable regarding the preparation for a change of state, while the act that formally completes that change is not necessarily unchangeable. Thus, concerning actual transgression, faith and repentance have always been necessary for forgiveness, justification, sanctification, adoption, and salvation in all religious dispensations. In a word, God cannot forgive an unrepentant and unbelieving transgressor. However, whether this or that act will complete a change of state regarding man's relationships to the moral universe; whether that act will be circumcision, animal sacrifice, baptism, confession, prayer, etc., is not inherently immutable in either divine or human nature. It has changed over time; but faith in God's requirements and repentance for past transgressions are now, have always been, and will always be necessary for forgiveness.

The reasoning behind this is that faith and repentance change a person's heart towards God; and if there were no universe beyond God and the sinner, any further actions regarding this would be unnecessary. But regarding the condition of sinners in the universe, and their perspectives, emotions, relationships, and way of life, more than faith and repentance, or a change of perspective and feelings, is necessary for actual, tangible, and formal pardon, justification, sanctification, adoption, and the salvation of the soul from sin. Hence, the practices of baptism, confession, prayer, fasting, and intercession arose.

It is wise and kind for Heaven to ordain such acts, or to establish such practices that will assure ourselves and others of our new relationships; and to base our *enjoyment* of the favor and love of God not merely on faith and repentance, or any other mental act; but on certain clear, overt actions, such as baptism, confession, prayer, etc., which affect ourselves and others far more than they possibly can affect God himself; being the outcome of our faith, or perhaps, rather, only the fulfillment of our faith in the promises of God.