1. Patriarchal Age of the World 

   The  world  has  its  infancy  as  well  as  man.  Families  preceded nations.  Family  worship  was,  therefore,  the  first  religious institution. 

At the head of this institution naturally stood *the father of every family.* From necessity and from choice, he was the prophet, the priest, and the king of his household. As a *prophet,* he instructed his household in the knowledge of God, and in the history of man. As a *priest,* he officiated at his family altar, interceded for those under his care, and pronounced benedictions upon his children. As a *lawgiver* and *king,* he commanded his children and servants, and rewarded them according to merit. By a divine ordinance, the *first fathers  of  mankind*  were  thus  constituted  prophets,  priests,  and kings. Hence, the first religious and political institution is properly called '*the Patriarchal.*' 

Family worship was, then, the *first social worship;* and during the first ages of the world (for at least 2500 years) it was the  *only social worship,* of divine authority. Though other institutions have since  been  added,  this  has  never  been  superseded.  Having  its foundation  in  the  matrimonial  compact,  the  most  ancient  of  all religious  and  political  institutions,  and  this  being  founded  on nature itself, it never can be superseded. While the forms of this worship have always been adapted to the genius of the various revelations  of  God  vouchsafed  to  mankind,  it  has  continued through all the changes of six thousand years, and will continue till the day when men, like angels of God, shall neither marry nor give in marriage. 

Family worship, so long as it continued the only social worship, underwent  no  material  change;  and  this  is  the  period  which  is properly called *the Patriarchal age of the world.* So long as the descendants  of  one  man  and  one  woman  continued  under  the paternal roof, or until they became heads of families themselves, they  continued  under  this  religious  and  political  administration. And if, after marriage, they did not migrate to a great distance from the  patrimonial  inheritance,  the  paternal  authority  was  still acknowledged and acquiesced in. Thus, in process of time, he who at  first  was  only  the  head  of  a  single  family,  if  his  days  were prolonged and his progeny multiplied, became the paternal prince, or chief patriarch of a tribe. 

In the youth of time and freshness of human nature, families soon became  large;  and  as  the  father  and  head  could  not  always  be present while he lived, and as he might die before all his children could have become heads of families, it became necessary that a substitute in his absence, and a successor in case of his premature death,  should  be  appointed  to  fill  his  place  and  administer  the affairs of the family. Nature and reason alike pointed to the first born son, and religion consecrated him his vicegerent. Hence, the privileges and honors of the first born son were both religious and political; and thus the duties devolving upon him gave him a right to a double portion of the inheritance. Esau was, therefore, both *prodigal* and *profane* in selling his birthright for a meal of pottage. 

The  antiquity  of  this  arrangement  appeared  from  the  envy  and jealousy of Cain, roused at the rejection of his offering and the acceptance  of  that  of  Abel.  That  jealousy  seems  to  have  been kindled into rage because of his birthright. This is fairly implied in God's address to Cain, when that address is fairly translated and understood. "If ye do well, shall you not have the excellency; and if you do not well, sin precludes you (from the excellency.) And (Abel shall be subject to you) to you shall be his desire, and you shall rule over him."2 

The moral and religious institutions of the patriarchal or family worship, which continued from the fall of Adam to the covenant of circumcision,  were  the  Sabbath,  the  service  of  the  altar,  oral instruction, prayer, praise, and benediction. With the addition of circumcision in the family of one patriarch, for special purposes these  were  the  parts  of  that  system  which  continued  for  two thousand five hundred years. 

The religious observance of weeks or Sabbaths in commemoration of Creation, and prospective of an eternal rest, to arise out of the sacrificial and typical institution, was religiously observed to the giving of the law, or the erection of the Jewish institution. Thus the law of the Sabbath commences with the words, "*Remember the sabbath.*"  The  righteous  always  remembered  the  weeks,  and regarded the conclusion of the week as holy to the Lord. Hence, even  after  the  apostasy,  which  issued  in  the  neglect  of  family worship, in consequence of the sons of God intermarrying with the daughters of men, and which brought a flood of water upon the world of the ungodly — we find Noah religiously counting his weeks even while incarcerated in the ark. In the wilderness of Sin, before the giving of the law, we also find the Jews observing the Sabbath. And to facilitate the observance of it, God wrought three special miracles  during  the  peregrinations  of  Israel.  He  gave  two  days' portion  of  manna  on  the  sixth  day — none  on  the  seventh — and preserved from putrefaction that portion laid up for the Sabbath.3 

Sin offerings and thank offerings, on altars both of stone and earth, were  presented  to  the  Lord — the  former  in  faith  of  the  promise concerning the bruising the serpent's head by the offspring of the woman — the latter in grateful acknowledgment of the goodness of God  in  creation  and  providence.  Cain,  without  faith  in  the promised redemption, like many deists and natural religionists in our time, did  acknowledge the  goodness  and care of God by a thank-offering; but Abel, *by faith in that promise,* not only offered his thank offering, but a lamb as a sin offering: therefore, while God respected not Cain's oblation without faith in that promise, he testified in favor of the *gifts* of Abel — he accepted his sin offering and his thank offering. 

In the very brief and general outlines of almost two thousand five hundred years given us in the book of Genesis, we find sundry allusions  to  this  part  of  the  patriarchal  institution.  Immediately after his egress from the ark, we find Noah rearing his altar upon the baptized earth, and of every clean bird and beast offering to the Lord whole burnt offerings. Thus began Noah, after the deluge, to worship the Lord according to the patriarchal institution. And thus we  find  Abraham,  Isaac,  Jacob,  Job,  and  other  patriarchs presenting their sacrifices to the Lord, while the family worship was the only religious institution to the world. 

Even libations, drink offerings, and anointing as token of gratitude and consecration, are found in this most ancient and venerable, institution. "Jacob rose  up early in  the  morning, took  the stone which he had put for his pillow, set it up for a pillar, and poured oil upon the top of it."4 "And Jacob set up a pillar in the place where 

God talked with him, even a pillar of stone, and he poured a drink offering thereon, and he poured oil thereon."5 

A beautiful and instructive instance of ancient family worship, and of  the  sacredotal  functions,  as  exercised  by  the  patriarchs  in reference  to  *the  altar,*  we  have  in  that  most  ancient  of  books, supposed by many to have been written by Moses while in the land of  Midian;  but  according  to  others,  by  Job  himself,  who  was certainly contemporary with *Eliphaz the Temanite.* Eliphaz was the son of Teman, who was the son of Eliphaz, who was the first son of Esau, the son of Isaac, the son of Abraham. He therefore lived before Moses. Thus we find him also officiating at the altar. We are told that "his sons  went and feasted in each other's houses, every one his day, and sent and called for their sisters to eat and drink with them. And it was so, that when the days of their feasting had gone about, that Job sent and sanctified them, and rose up early in the morning and offered burnt offerings according to the number of them all: for Job said, It may be that my sons have sinned  and  cursed  God  in  their  hearts.  Thus  acted  Job continually."6 

The same Job, by divine appointment, acted as priest or intercessor in behalf of his three friends, princes of Edom: for having spoken amiss, they were commanded to take seven bullocks and seven rams, and go to Job, the servant of God, and to offer them up for themselves; and "Job my servant shall pray for you." "Job prayed for them, and the Lord accepted his prayer, and forgave Eliphaz, Bildad,  and  Zophar."  "The  Lord  also  accepted  and  blessed  Job after he had prayed for these his friends, and the Lord turned again the captivity of Job."7 

During this period of the world, there was but one high or general priest, specially called and sent by God. "He was King of Salem and Priest of the Most High God." To him the patriarch Abraham paid  tithes  or  gave  the  tenth  of  the  spoils  taken  in  war,  and Melchisedeck blessed him. He was of an order of his own sort. He had  no  predecessor,  successor,  nor  equal  in  the  age  of  family worship. 

From all these facts and documents we learn that the service of the altar belonged first to the father of the family — next, to his eldest son — that  it  consisted  in  presenting  sin  offerings  and  thank offerings of various sorts in behalf of himself or family — that all pious sons and individuals might *for themselves* erect altars, offer sacrifices,  and  pour  out  libations  and  thank  offerings  to  the Lord; — that  these  sacrificial  observances  were  generally,  if  not always,  accompanied  with  prayer,  intercession,  and thanksgivings; — and that intercession in behalf of those under the care of any father or patriarch was a part of the first institution. 

Benediction also was one of the first duties of this office. Fathers pronounced  blessings  on  their  children.  Superiors  in  age  and standing blessed their inferiors. Melchisedeck blessed Abraham, Isaac blessed Jacob, and Jacob blessed the twelve patriarchs. The invocations  of  blessings  and  the  imposition  of  hands  upon  the head, were parts of the family worship institution. 

Concerning  prayer  and  praise,  as  we  cannot  imagine  a  religion without them, it is unnecessary to speak particularly of them as parts of the patriarchal institution. Jubal soon taught men to handle the harp and organ, and piety soon consecrated them to the praise of God. The melodies of nature soon taught men to tune his voice to God. Isaac went into the fields at eventide for secret prayer. Abraham interceded for Sodom until he was ashamed to push his importunities farther; and for Abimelech, king of Egypt, and his family, he made his requests to God. Of him and his patriarchal character God said, "I know Abraham that he will command his children, and his household after him, and they shall keep the ways of the Lord, to do justice and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that which he has spoken of him."8 

Prophets of a public character were occasionally raised up to bring men back to the primitive simplicity of the patriarchal institution, as  well  as  to  lead  them  forward  to  the  future  developments  of God's purposes in reference to this work of redemption. Amongst these the most conspicuous were Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob. To all these were given new visions of the future, and thus they  were  all  preachers  of  righteousness  and  reformers  in  their respective generations. 

From these gleanings from the book of Genesis, one may learn that the family worship institution, which was divinely instituted in the first age of the world, embraced the observance of the Sabbath, the service  of  the  altar,  oral  instruction,  prayer,  intercession, thanksgiving, and benediction. It contemplated no other bond of union than the marriage covenant, and the relations springing out of it. Doing justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with God, were  enforced  in  all  its  maxims,  and  in  the  examples  of  those whom God honored and approved. 

There was, during the long period of this family institution, no community  separated  from  the  world  larger  than  a  single household — no public altars — no temples — no established order of public teachers; therefore, there were no initiating or separating institutions. There was no *circumcision* for the infant, nor *washing of regeneration* for the instructed. These institutions of latter times had respect to public professing communities; and therefore, for two  thousand  years  there  was  no  initiating  rite  or  ordinance amongst men. 

Wherever the family curtains were spread and a tent erected, the devout father built his own altar to the Lord, gathered his own children  and  domestics  around  him,  instructed  them  in  the knowledge  of  God  the  creator  and  preserver  of  all;  and  in  the history of man, his origin and destiny, as far as revealed to them. They  offered  their  thank  offerings,  acknowledgments  of  favors received;  and  when  conscious  of  sin,  they  presented  their  sin offering,  with  confessions,  and  in  faith  of  God's  promise, supplicated  pardon.  Such  are  the  essential  attributes  of  the patriarchal institution, and of the family worship, as learned from the writings of Moses. 

But as the root of all subsequent dispensations of God's mercy and favor  to  man  was  planted  in  the  patriarchal  institution,  it  is necessary  to  our  plan,  before  we  advance  farther,  to  pay  some attention to one of the patriarchs, whose fame is eternal, on whom God bestowed an honor above all earthly honor, and who stands enrolled in the annals of time as **the friend of god**. The intelligent reader needs not  to  be  informed that we now  call his  attention specially to Abraham.  

***Abraham*** 

Reader, attend! "I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: this is my name forever, and this is my memorial to  all  generations."  And  shall  not  the  name,  the  calling,  the blessing, and the history of Abraham always occupy large space in the records of God's government of man, and in all the details of his redemption! 

Because of his unprecedented faith in God's promises and exalted piety, he was constituted the *father of all believers;* and his whole life is made a model for all the children of God, as far as walking by faith in God's promises is an ornament to human character. 

Sufficient, then, to our present purpose, we observe, that *during the family worship institution,* a little after the commencement of the third Millennium, about the 75th year of his life, God appeared to Abraham while he yet lived in Ur of Chaldea, and commanded him to depart out of that country, and that he would do for him certain things.  Abraham  obeyed.  God  gratuitously  tendered  him  *two promises,* not only interesting and valuable to Abraham himself, but to all the human race. 

These two promises were intended to be the basis of a two-fold relation  to  God,  and  the  foundation  of  two  distinct  religious institutions,  called  "the  Old  Testament  and  the  New,"  "the  Old Covenant and the New," "the Two Covenants," and "the Covenants of Promise." These are contemplated in them the constitution for a temporal and spiritual kingdom of God — a kingdom of God of this world, and a kingdom of God not of this world. Be it, therefore, always remembered, when we attempt to form correct views of the whole economy of God's redemption, that these two promises were made while the patriarchal institution was yet standing and several centuries before its close. What, then, it will be asked, are these two promises?  

***Two Promises?*** 

We find them in their most simple form in the beginning of the 12th chapter of Genesis.  

**The first — **"*I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name great, and thou shalt be a blessing. I will bless them that bless thee, curse them that curse thee.*" 

**The second** — "*In thee shall all the families of the earth be blessed.*" 

These  promises,  when  fully  developed,  contained  numerous blessings.  They  are,  however,  in  all  their  details  separate  and distinct from each other. Abraham's family alone are personally concerned  in  the  first — all  families  of  the  earth  in  the  second. Temporal and earthly are the blessings of the former — spiritual and eternal are the blessings of the latter. Paul calls the second, "The gospel preached to Abraham," and "The covenant confirmed by God in reference to the Messiah, four hundred and thirty  years before the giving of the law." The Jewish kingdom in all its glory was but the development of the first — the Christian kingdom in its present and future blessings is the consummation of the second. 

***Covenant of Circumcision*** 

In pursuance of the first promise, and in order to its exact and literal  accomplishment,  about  twenty-four  years  after  its promulgation of "*Covenant of Circumcision*" was established. This "covenant  in  the  flesh,"  marked  out  and  defined  the  natural descendants of Abraham, and gave to the world a full proof of the faithfulness  of  God,  putting  it  in  the  power  of  every  one  to ascertain how God keeps his covenant of promise with his people. This  gave  to  the  descendants  of  Abraham  the  title  of  "The Circumcision," and beautifully represented the separation of God's people from the children of this world.  

The land of Canaan, as *the inheritance* of this nation, is repeatedly promised to Abraham; and as soon as Isaac, the child of promise, is born  and  circumcised,  the  promise  of  the  "**seed**"  in  which  all nations were to be blessed, is confined to him. Not in Ishmael, but "in Isaac, shall *thy seed* be called."9 

After the death of Abraham and towards the close of the life of Isaac, his  father's  God  gave him a second edition  of these two promises. The first is considerably amplified in its details, while the second is repeated almost in the same words. That which was first  to  be  accomplished  is  first  developed,  and  its  provisions pointed out. "I will be with thee and will bless thee; for unto thee and to thy seed I will give all these countries, and I will perform all the oath which I sware to Abraham thy father; and will make thy seed to multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give to thy seed all these countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed: because Abraham obeyed my voice, and kept my charge, my commandments, my statutes, and my laws."10

The same two promises are repeated in almost the same words to Jacob, the son of Isaac at the time he had the vision of the ladder reaching from earth to heaven, while, in obedience to a command given him by his parents, he was on his way to Padan-aram in quest of a wife. On these *three* great occasions — to Abraham — to Isaac — to  Jacob — these  two  promises  are  solemnly  pronounced; always  standing  in  the  same  order — never  confounded;  but  as distinct as earth and heaven — as time and eternity. 

Four hundred and thirty years after the first solemn declaration of these promises, the descendants of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in virtue of the promise, were redeemed out of bondage, in Egypt, and saved from the tyranny and cruelty of Pharaoh. Then, in order to  the  *full  completion*  of  its  stipulations,  God,  by  the  hand  of Moses, proposed a covenant with all Israel at Sinai; in which he guarantees  to  do  all  for  them  contemplated  in  the  promise, confirmed by an oath to Abraham, in being a God to his seed after him.  

***Sinaitic Covenant*** 

This Sinaitic constituted them a kingdom of God, a holy nation, a peculiar  people.  All  the  blessings  comprehended  in  the  first promise to Abraham, or that could grow out of the relation to God, which  it  contemplated,  were  in  full  detail  carried  out  into  this transaction,  and  secured  to  the  whole  nation.  The  relation  was, however,  temporal,  and  its  blessings  temporal  and  earthly.  The second promise made no part of the Jewish institution or covenant at  Sinai,  more  than  it  did  of  the  patriarchal  or  antecedent institution. The typical or figurative part of the family worship, enlarged and improved, was translated into the *national* institution and made a part of it; and whatever *spiritual* privilege was enjoyed by  the  Jew,  was  enjoyed  upon  the  same  principle  with  the patriarch — by faith in the second promise, and by an intelligent and believing attendance upon all the  appointed means which either prefigured the coming redemption, or realized the blessings which were to be derived through the promised seed. 

The **seed** in which all the families of the earth were to be blessed, was in the nation, but in no other sense than as it was in the people while in Egypt, or in the patriarchs before they went down into Egypt.  It  was  in  the  nation,  but  no  element  of  the  national institution. They had the second promise made to their fathers, and all the faithful and approved among them believed that promise, and acted conformably to it. Thus amongst the Jews, even before the coming of the Messiah, they were 

***Two Seeds*** 

The  natural  and  the  spiritual  children  of  Abraham.  The  whole nation were his literal and natural children; and such of them as believed the second promise and understood it were not only his natural children, but his children in the same sense in which all *believing Gentiles* are by virtue of the second promise constituted the  children  of  Abraham.  The  first,  like  Ishmael,  were  born according to the flesh — the fleshy seed of Abraham; the second, like  Isaac,  were  the  children  of  faith  in  the  promise:  and  thus Abraham  is  the  constituted  father  of  all  who  believe  in  that promise, whether of his flesh or not. 

But the second promise was not fulfilled for nearly one thousand five hundred years after the first, or after the national institution was confirmed at Sinai; and therefore  

***The Blessings of Abraham*** 

Which as to come on the nations through his seed, through faith in the accomplished promises, was to be the basis and the substance of a new institution. This "blessing of Abraham" includes all the spiritual and eternal blessings which are laid up in his seed, who is the ark of this new constitution, in whom all the promises of God are verified, and in whom they are deposited for the comfort and salvation of all the faithful children of God. Whatever concerned the  family  of  Abraham,  coming  through  the  first  promise, descended  upon  the  family  principle  which  is  only  *flesh;*  but whatever concerns all saints of all nations descends upon the new principle of *faith.* "They who are of faith," says Paul, "are blessed with believing Abraham." And "If you be Christ's, then" and only then, "are you Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise." 

The blessing of Abraham was then promised in the patriarchal age antecedent to the Jewish national institution, and independent of it; therefore  that  institution  cannot  affect,  much  less  disannul,  the blessings  promised  in  the  covenant,  confirmed  before  by  God, respecting the Messiah, in the time of family worship, and four hundred and thirty years before the Jewish institution began. 

In calling Abraham, and in making him the father of many nations, and the depository of still more precious promises and revelations, God did not supersede the family worship. He only added to the stock of religious knowledge, strengthened the faith, and enlarged the hopes of that single family. The family institution continued without the slightest change, except in one particular specified in the  covenant  of  circumcision,  as  respected  the  single  family  of Abraham,  for  four  hundred  and  thirty  years  after  the  charter concerning his seed and that concerning the Messiah were secured to this renowned patriarch. Thus we have traced the continuance of the family religion, or patriarchal economy, for two thousand five hundred years, and are now prepared to make a few remarks on the Jewish  national  institution,  though  we  have  already  anticipated almost all that is necessary to our present object. Still, however, we shall make it the object of a distinct notice. (See Next Essay) 

