2. The Jewish Institution 

In this age of improvement of divine institutions, we read and hear much of "two dispensations of the covenant of grace;" thus making the  Jewish  and  the  Christian  institutions  dispensations  of  one "covenant  of  grace."  Why  not  make  the  patriarchal,  (still  more venerable for its antiquity, and which continued a thousand years longer than the Jewish,) also  a dispensation of  the covenant  of grace, and then we should have had  *three* dispensations of one covenant? This is but a "*show* of wisdom." The Holy Spirit calls them  "two  covenants,"  or  "two  institutions,"  and  not  two modifications of one covenant; and it speaks of each as established upon  promises.  The  Jewish  was  established  upon  temporal  and earthly promises, contained in the first promise made to Abraham; but  the  new,  says  Paul,  "is  established  upon  *better  promises,*" growing out of that concerning *the blessing of the nations* in the promised seed.11

The Jewish institution commenced and continued about 1500 years before the Reign of Heaven began. It was not substituted for the family worship, but added to it; affecting, however, the patriarchal institution in some respects, as far as concerned the single family of Abraham. The individual families of the nation of the Jews, *as such,* had still their family worship — still the worship of God was heard in the dwellings of the righteous; and, like Joshua, every good Israelite said, "As for me and my family, we will serve the Lord." 

In four hundred years the family of Abraham had, in the line of Isaac and Jacob, in fulfilment of the first promise, grown up into millions. Not less than two millions12 came up out of Egypt under the  conduct  of  Moses.  The  heavenly  Father,  in  progressive development of his plan of blessing all nations, leaves all the world under the family worship institution, and erects the whole progeny of  Abraham  that  came  up  out  of  Egypt  into  one  great  national institution. He condescends to appear in the character of *King of the Jews,* and to make them a *kingdom of God,* as preparatory to the appearance of his *Son,* who is predestined to be the King of the whole  earth,  and  to  have  a  kingdom  which  shall  ultimately embrace all the nations of the world.  

The  twelve  tribes  were  brought  into  the  form  of  one  great worshipping family, presenting through the common High Priest their united worship to God. This gave rise to the erection of one public house consecrated to the Lord, as the place of meeting in their social and national character. A constitution, political, moral, and religious, was submitted to the people; and on their adoption of it, they became the covenanted people of God. This constitutional kingdom was built upon precepts and promises; and its worship when fully developed was  little more than the extension of the family worship to one great national family. They had one king, one high priest, one national altar, one national house of God, one morning and evening service, one great national sacrifice, and one great annual atonement. The nation was a family of families, and whatever pertained to a single family in its family worship was extended and accommodated to this great confederate family. 

Various mystic and significant institutions distinguished this nation from all others; for it was one principal object of its institution to keep its subjects separate and distinct from all other people till Messiah (the promised seed) should come. Another object was, to picture  out  in  appropriate  types  the  spiritual  worship  of  the kingdom  of  heaven,  and  to  exhibit  the  great  doctrines  of  faith, repentance,  remission, adoption, and inheritance, by  picturesque images, ingeniously devised to adumbrate the whole doctrine of reconciliation and sanctification to God. 

The Jewish institution is not to be regarded only in its political, moral, and religious aspects, but especially in its figurative and prospective character. God so wisely and benevolently contrived it from its origin to its close, that its whole history — the fates and fortunes of its subjects from their descent into Egypt, their travels thence  to  Canaan  and  settlement  in  the  land  of  promise — their fortunes in that land to their final catastrophe, should exactly and impressively shadow forth the new institution with the fates and fortunes of the subjects of this new and more glorious order of things. "All these things happened to them for *types,*" (examples,) says Paul, "and they are written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world have come." The same great commentator on this  institution  not  only  presents  the  history  of  its  subjects  as instructive  to  the  citizens  of  the  new  institution,  but  of  the tabernacle he says, "It was a figurative representation for the time then present," and the furniture thereof "the patterns of things in the heavens." "The law," he adds, "contained only a shadow of the good things to come." A shadow, indeed, proceeding from a man, a house,  a  tree,  is  not,  and  cannot  be,  an  exact  image  or representation  of  them;  yet,  when  explained  by  a  verbal description, it greatly facilitates an easy and correct conception of them. 

So full of the doctrine of the new institution was the old, that we find  all  the  Apostles  and  Christian  writers  unceremoniously applying every thing they quote from the law, the prophets, and the psalms,  to  the  Messiah,  his  kingdom,  and  the  fortunes  of  his people; as if the Jewish writings had no other object than to unfold the kingdom of heaven. Jesus begins with Abraham seeing his day on Mount Moriah in the typical resurrection of Isaac. Paul regards Hagar,  Ishmael,  Sarah, Isaac, as  the best  illustration of the  *two institutions;* and John ends with the description of the descent of Jerusalem from heaven. 

Every one, then, who would accurately understand the Christian institution must approach it through the Mosaic; and he that would be a proficient in the Jewish, must make Paul his commentator. While the mere politician, moralist, or religionist, contemplate the one without the other, though he may find much to admire in both, he  will  never  understand  either.  A  veil,  thick  as  that  which concealed the glory of the face of Moses from the Israelites, will hide the glory of the Jewish and Christian institutions from his view. 

Not only did the tabernacle, the temple, their furniture, the service of both, the priests, the sacrifices, the festivals, the convocations, and all the ordinances of that Ritual, together with the history of that people, assume the picturesque and figurative character, but almost all the illustrious and highly distinguished personages of that institution were made prophetic or typical of the Messiah or of the great incidents of his life, sufferings, and triumphs, and the leading  affairs  of  his  government.  Amongst  *persons*  in  the patriarchal  and  Jewish  ages  who,  in  one  or  more  prominent characters or incidents, or in their general history adumbrated the Messiah  and  his  reign,  the  following  group  occupy  a  lofty eminence: — Adam,  Abel,  Noah,  Melchisedeck,  Isaac,  Jacob, Joseph, Moses, Aaron, Joshua, Samson, David, Jonah. Of *things* of this class, as well as persons highly figurative and instructive, are the visions of Jacob's ladder — the burning bush — the pillar of cloud and fire — the manna — the rock Horeb, a fountain of living water in the wilderness — the veil of Moses — the brazen serpent — the victory over the nations of Canaan, and the land of Canaan itself. And of *ordinances,* the passover, the scape goat, the red heifer, the year of jubilee, the law of the leper, the kinsman redeemer, the cities of refuge; together with all the sacrifices, washings, anointings, and consecrations of the *holy* nation. 

But  a  third  object  of  the  Jewish  institution,  of  paramount importance to the world, was the furnishing of a new alphabet and language  (the  elements  of  heavenly  science,)  without  which  it would appear to have been almost, if not altogether, impossible to learn  the  spiritual  things,  or  to  make  any  proficiency  in  the knowledge  of  those  relations  which  Christianity  unfolds.  The language of the new institution is therefore explained by that of the old. No one can understand the dialect of the kingdom of heaven who has not studied the dialect of the antecedent administrations of heaven  over  the  patriarchs  and  Jews.  The  most  striking  and characteristic attribute of the sacred dialect is, that the elements of it  are  composed  of  the  incidents  of  history,  or  what  we  call *remarkable providences.* 

I  cannot  explain  myself  better,  not  render  my  readers  a  more essential service, than by illustrating by an actual detail of sacred history, the following proposition, viz.: — *That sacred history or the remarkable  instances  of  God's  providence  to  the  Jews  and Patriarchs, are the foundation  of  the sacred dialect  of  the new institution.* Or, if the reader will understand it better, it may be expressed — *All  the  leading  words  and  phrases  of  the  New Testament are to be explained and understood by the history of the Jewish nation and God's government of them.* Take the following as a mere specimen: —  

God *called* Abram out of Ur, and changed his name into *Abraham;* and the name of his wife Sarai into *Sarah.* He *promised* Isaac as the  person  in  whom  his  *seed*  should  be  *called.*  God  did  *tempt* Abraham,  commanding  him  to  *offer*  Isaac  for  a  burnt offering — Isaac  had  two  sons — Esau  the  elder,  and  Jacob  the younger. Esau *despised* his *birthright* and *sold* it to Jacob. Jacob wrestled with God, and *prevailed;* he obtained a blessing, and was therefore called *Israel.* He had *twelve* sons: of these Joseph was his favorite. His brethren *envied* him, and *sold* him for twenty pieces of silver. Joseph *found grace* in the sight of his master. *The Lord was with Joseph.* He was cast into prison, and from thence was elevated  to  the  *governor*  of  Egypt  under  Pharaoh.  A  famine  in Canaan compelled Jacob and his sons into Egypt for bread, and Joseph was *made known* to his brethren. Joseph died in Egypt and left his father's house in the land. They multiplied exceedingly, and the Egyptians greatly *afflicted* and *oppressed* the Israelites. *Moses* was born and exposed: Pharaoh's daughter found him and *adopted* him for a son. Moses fled into Midian, and married the daughter of the priest or prince of Midian, and kept his father-in-law's flock in the *desert,* and came to Horeb, *the mountain of God.* The Lord appeared to him in *a flame of fire* in a bush. The bush burned and was not consumed. Moses *drew near,* and then first stood on *holy ground.* God *sent* him to Egypt to lead *his* people out of *bondage.* 

God made him say to the *children of Israel,* '**I am** has sent me to you. Gather the *elders* of Israel and say to them, *The Lord God* of your fathers, the God of Abraham,' etc. 'has sent me to you. I will *smite*  Egypt  with  my  *wonders,*  and  *bring  you  up  out  of  the afflictions* of Egypt. Tell Pharaoh, Israel is *my son — my first born.* Take Aaron with thee, and thou shalt *put words into his mouth;* and I will be *with thy mouth* and with his mouth: he shall be to thee instead of a mouth, and thou shalt be to him *instead of God.* Take thy *rod* in thy hand. The Lord *sent* Aaron to Moses: he met him in the mount and *kissed* him. And the Lord *visited* his people. And the people *believed when they heard* that the Lord had *looked upon* their affliction. Pharaoh oppressed them still more. The Lord said, with a *strong hand* shall he let them go. I will *redeem* them with a stretched  out  arm,  and  with  great  *judgments.*  I  will  give  you Canaan for a *heritage;* I will take you to me *for a people. I will be your God.*' 

Moses  said,  I  am  a  man  of  *uncircumcised  lips,*  and  how  shall Pharaoh *hearken* to me? I have made thee a *god* to Pharaoh, and Aaron *thy prophet.*  I will  multiply my  *signs,*  and bring out  *my people,* and *harden* Pharaoh's heart. When he says, "Show me a miracle," cast your rod before him, and *it shall become* a serpent. Still  Pharaoh  refused,  and  *hardened  his  heart.*  The  magicians overcome with the *signs,* said, *This is the finger of God.* The *God of the Hebrews* said, Let *my people go.* I have *roused* thee up (as a lion)  to  show  in  you  my  power,  and  to  make  *my  name  known* through *all the earth.* The Lord slew all the *first born* of Egypt after he had *plagued* them exceedingly. Pharaoh commanded them to depart; but he pursued them to the Red Sea. Israel fainted at the sight before and behind them. Moses said, Stand still and see *the salvation  of  God.*  The  sea  was  divided.  Covered  with  a  cloud, Israel marched through  as  on dry  ground. The  waters stood on either  side  as  a  wall.  Pharaoh  pursued  with  his  chariots  and horsemen, but the waters returned, and they were drowned. Thus the  Lord *redeemed, saved, delivered, and brought  Israel  out  of bondage.* 

After this deliverance, Moses and the children of Israel sang, "The Lord is become *my salvation;* he is *my God.* Thou hast overthrown them  that  *rose  up  against  thee.*  Thou  hast  *led  forth  thy  people* whom thou *hast redeemed.* Thou *hast guided them* in thy strength to thy *holy habitation.* The inhabitants of Canaan shall be still as a stone  till  *thy  people*  pass  over,  O  Lord,  the  people  *thou  hast purchased.*  Thou  shalt  plant  them  in  the  mountain  of  *thine inheritance;* in the *sanctuary* which *thy hands* have *established.*" 

They came into *the wilderness of Sin.* They cried for bread, and God *rained bread from heaven upon them,* that he might *prove* them whether or not they would *walk in his law,* and they did eat manna forty years till they came to the borders of Canaan. 

They complained for water, and tempted God. And Moses *smote the rock* in Horeb, and water gushed out. But Moses was wroth, and smote the rock twice, and he and Aaron thus *rebelled* against God, and fell in the wilderness. The Lord made a covenant with the whole nation at Sinai, and made them a *peculiar treasure* above all people — a *kingdom of priests,* a *holy nation;* and God *spake* all the words of the law, written on two tables of stone; and  *spake to Israel from heaven.* 

The Lord, by Moses, gave them directions for rearing a *tabernacle,* and a pattern for all its furniture. And as *a ransom for his soul,* every man, rich and poor, was to pay half a shekel as an *offering to the Lord* to *make an atonement* for his soul; and it was given for *the service* of the tabernacle. When the tabernacle was reared and finished, *the glory of the Lord* filled the tabernacle and the *cloud* covered it. And when the cloud *was taken up,* they journeyed; but until it was taken up, they journeyed not. The *cloud* was on the tabernacle by day, and *fire* was on it by night, in the sight of all Israel throughout all their journeys. 

And before Moses died he *laid his hands* upon Joshua, and gave him a *charge* as the *Lord commanded;* and thus put *honor* upon him, that the children of Israel might be *obedient* to him as their *savior.* "As I was *with Moses,* so will I be *with thee*," saith God: "I will not fail thee nor *forsake* thee." 

Could we thus proceed with the history of this people, and add to their  history  the  observance  of  their  religious  institutions,  we should find out the true meaning of the sacred style of the New Testament  with  more  accuracy  and  certainty,  than  from  all  the commentators  of  ancient  and  modern  times.  This,  as  a  sample, must suffice for our present purpose. 

From the premises now before us, the specifications of the outlines of the Sinaitic and national institution, and the terms and phrases found  in  the  history  of  this  people,  we  may  discover  in  what *relation* they stood to  God, and what  *favors*  he bestowed upon them in that relation. 

They were *called* and *chosen,* or the *elect* of God as a nation. As such,  they  were  *delivered,  saved,  bought,*  or  *purchased,*  and *redeemed.* God is said to have *created, made, formed,* and *begotten* them. As such he is called their *Father,* their *God,* their *Redeemer,* their *King,* their *Savior,* their *Salvation;* and they are called his *children,  sons*  and  *daughters;  born  to  him,*  his  *house,  people, inheritance, family, servants.* 

As a *chartered* and congregated people, they are called *the city, the holy city, the city of the Lord, Jerusalem, Zion, Mount Zion, the city of David.* Other nations in contrast with them, are called *not a people, aliens, strangers, enemies, far off, unclean.* 

Various similitudes expressive of the kind relation in which they stood  to  God  are  also  found  in  the  pages  of  the  ancient institutions — such as *husband* and *wife, shepherd* and *flock, vine* and *vineyard, mother* and *children.* They are said to be *written* or *enrolled* in *the book of God;* to be *planted, washed, sanctified, clean,  separated  to  God;*  they  are  called  *the  house,  building, sanctuary, dwelling place* of God; *a kingdom of priests, a holy nation, a peculiar people, saints,* etc. 

Those who are curious to trace these phrases descriptive of the relation and privileges of this ancient kingdom of God, had better (in addition to the passages quoted in their history from Egypt to the  Jordan,)  examine  the  following  passages: —   Exodus  14:30; 15:16;  19:6;  Deut.  4:37;  7:6;  10:15;  14:1;  1:31;  7:5;  32:6; 32:18-19; 18:7; 3:18, 20; 12:9. 1 Kings 3:8. Psalm 105:6; 33:13; 105:43; 106:5, 21; 124:2; 149:2. Isa 41:8-9, 43:1, 3, 5, 7; 51:2, 4. Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the Psalms of David throughout, etc. 

Unless  we  should  write  a  full  treatise  on  these  antecedent institutions, we cannot with propriety descend farther into details. The outlines, as far as subordinate to the theme of this essay, are now  before  the  reader;  and  with  this  preparation  we  shall  now invite his attention to **the kingdom of heaven.** 

