3. The Kingdom of Heaven 

And why, an *American* would say, is it not called the *Republic* of Heaven, and the Chief called the *President* of a Celestial Republic? Certainly there were the Republics of Greece and Rome before the doctrine of this Kingdom was first promulged, and the Gentiles as well as the Jews could have understood the figure of a Republic as well as that of a Kingdom. It was not, then, because there was not in society a model or type of this sort; but because such a type would have been inapposite to the nature of this institution. 

History testifies that Republics are better adapted to peace than war,  and  that  they  are  forced  and  unnatural  organizations  of society. Aristocracies and Republics owe all their attractions to the excessive corruptions of the governments under which they have originated. They are the reaction of force and fraud, of cruelty and oppression,  and  are  sustained  by  the  remembrance  and apprehension  of  the  evils  which  occasioned  them.  They  have always been extolled or admired either in contrast with vices and enormities  of  degenerate  and  profligate  monarchies,  or  in  the freshness of the recollections of the wrongs and outrages which have occasioned them; and men have generally tired of them when they became corrupt and forgetful of the oppressions and crimes which  forced  them  into  being.  So  that  the  corruptions  of monarchies have given birth to Republics, and the corruptions of these have originated monarchies again. 

In these last days of degeneracy, Republics are great blessings to mankind, as good physicians are blessings in times of pestilence; but yet it must be confessed that it would be a greater blessing to be  without  plagues  and  doctors.  While  men  are,  however,  so degenerate, and while selfishness and injustice are so rampant in society, republican officers are better than kings — because we can get rid of them sooner. They are indeed, kings under another name, with  a  short-leased  authority;  and  our  experience  fully demonstrates  that  in  these  degenerate  days  the  reigns  of  our republican kings are nearly long enough. Till the King of kings comes,  we  Christians  ought  to  be  good  republicans,  under  the conviction that human governments seldom grow better, and that the popular doctrine of our country is true — that political authority generally makes a man worse, and public favors almost invariably corrupt the heart. Rapid rotation in office is the practical influence of the republican theory; and the experiment proves that, brief as republican  authority  is,  it  is  sometimes  too  long  for  republican virtue  to  sustain  without  deterioration.  Now  if  this  be  true  of republican virtue, the brightest and the best, what earthly virtue can long resist the contamination of long protracted authority! 

Monarchy is the only form of government, however, which nature recognizes. It was the first, and it will be the last. A government with three or thirty heads is a monster; and therefore the beast that represents it comes out of the sea with a plurality of horns as well as heads. 

The  most  approved  theory  of  human  nature  and  of  human government now current wherever the English language is spoken, either in the Old World or in the New, is that a monarchy would be always  the  best  government,  because  the  cheapest,  the  most efficient, and the most dignified; provided only, that the crown was placed on the wisest head and the sceptre wielded by the purest hands.  Could  we  always  secure  this  we  would  be  monarchists: because we cannot, we are all republicans. 

But,  after  this  apology  for  the  phrase  *Kingdom  of  Heaven,*  we would recall the attention of the reader to the concession, made by republicans themselves, that a kingdom is better adapted to a state of  war,  than  a  republic;  and  that  this  beautiful,  though  most appropriate figure, which occurs in the New Testament more than one hundred and fifty times, and very often in the Old, presupposes a  state  of  war  as  existing  in  the  universe.  But  for  the  reasons assigned in preference of a monarchy, the *natural* government of the universe always was, is, and evermore shall be monarchy. God himself is of necessity absolute monarch of the universe. Had he not  essentially  sustained  that  relation  to  all  his  creatures,  there never  could  have  been  rebellion  nor  sin  in  his  dominions.  The systems of nature are all after this model. Every sun is a king over the  system  which  it  controls;  and  in  every  sphere  there  is  one controlling and supreme principles. It will be the last government; for  when  the  episode  in  the  great  drama  of  *rational*  existence which sin occasioned, shall have been completed, the government of the universe will assume its ancient order, and God be supreme monarch again. But this will not be till Jesus gives up the kingdom to God which a preternatural state of things put into his hands. This cannot be till he has subdued man to his rightful allegiance, or destroyed forever every opponent to the absolute monarchy of the Eternal Supreme: "for Jesus must reign till all his enemies be put under his feet." 

The kingdom which Jesus has received from his Father, however heavenly,  sublime,  and  glorious  it  may  be  regarded,  is  only temporal. It had a beginning, and it will have an end; for he must reign only *till* all enemies are put under his feet. But the transition of the sceptre into the hands of Emmanuel has not changed the government. He is now the hereditary Monarch of the universe, as well as the proper King of his own kingdom. He now reigns as absolutely over all principalities, hierarchs, and powers, celestial and terrestrial, as did the great God and Father of the universe, before he was invested with the regal authority. 

We have said it was a preternatural state of things which originated the kingdom of Jesus: therefore the object of this remedial reign is to destroy that preternatural state of things — to put down sin. Now as  all  human  governments  presuppose  disorder,  and  as  the kingdoms of this world generally have risen out of confusion and war, the kingdom of heaven of which we are to speak owes its origin to the celestial and terrestrial apostacies — the revolt of Satan and of Adam. Were there no justice within, or violence without, civil government would be wholly unnecessary, and its appendages an excresence upon society. Had there not been such a revolt and rebellion as sacred history records, there would have been no such kingdom  of  heaven  as  that  over  which  Jesus  the  Messiah  now presides.  Now  as  both  this  King  and  kingdom,  and  all  that appertains to them, were occasioned by such a preternatural state of things, we must view them in all their attributes and details, with reference to those circumstances which called them into being. 

***The Elements of a Kingdom*** 

We  must  understand  the  type,  or  we  cannot  understand  the antitype. We must understand that which is natural before we can understand  that  which  is  spiritual.  What,  then  are  the  essential elements of a kingdom as existing among men? They are five, viz: King,  Constitution,  Subjects,  Laws,  and  Territory.  Such  are  the essential parts of every political kingdom, perfect in its kind, now existing on earth. 

In *forming a state,* the essential elements are people and country. The  people  make  a  constitution,  and  this  makes  a  President  or King, citizens or subjects, and every thing else belonging to a state. It is, then, the relation into which the people resolve themselves, which make it a republic, an aristocracy, a monarchy. Do they choose a monarchy? They first make a constitution, and this places one upon the throne — makes them subjects, and then gives them laws. Although the constitution is first, in the order of nature, of all the elements of a kingdom, for it makes one man a king and the rest subjects; yet we cannot imagine a constitution in reference to a kingdom, without king and subjects. In speaking of them in detail, we cannot then speak of any one of them as existing without the others — we  must  regard  them  as  correlates,  and  as  coming  into existence contemporaneously. There is no husband nor wife before marriage, neither can there be a husband without a wife; yet one of the  parties  must  be  made  before  the  other.  Marriage  makes  a husband out of a bridegroom, and a wife out of the bride. So the constitution  makes  the  king  or  the  governor;  the  citizens  or subjects, out of the people, as the case may be; for there never can be a king or subject without a constitution, or, what is the same thing,  an  agreement,  verbal  or  written,  for  certain  privileges stipulated  and  conditioned.  In  every  well  regulated  political kingdom,  *in  the  order  of  nature,*  the  elements  stand  thus.  1. Constitution; 2. King; 3. Subjects; 4. Laws; 5. Territory.  

In the kingdom which God set up by Moses, the elements stood in this order. The constitution was first proposed under which God condescended to be their King, and they were to be regarded as his people or subjects; he then gave them laws and established them in the territory before promised. 

But in the kingdom of nature, or in the original kingdom of God, the elements are only four, and the order in which they stand are: 1. King; 2. Subjects; 3. Laws; 4. Territory. As Father and Creator of the kingdom, God himself was absolute Sovereign, whose will is the supreme law of the whole realm of nature. 

Having  ascertained  the  essential  elements  of  a  *kingdom,*  and marked the order in which they stand, before we particularly attend to  those  elements  in  order,  we  shall  ask,  Why  this  kingdom  is called the kingdom of *Heaven?* 

***The Name*** 

Heaven, and the Kingdom of Heaven are not one and the same thing. God is not the Kingdom of God. But as the kingdom of God is  something  pertaining  to  God,  so  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven  is something pertaining to heaven, and consequently to God. Whether always the phrases "the Kingdom of God" and the "Kingdom of heaven" exactly represent the same thing, certain it is that both phrases are often applied to the same institution.13

This is true of them, whether translated *reign* or *kingdom;* and it is very evident that frequently the original world *basileia* ought in preference to be rendered *reign,* inasmuch as this term better suits all those passages where *coming* or *approaching* is spoken of: for while  reigns  or  administrations  approach  and  recede,  kingdoms have  attributes  and  boundaries  which  are  stationary.  Reign  and Kingdom  of  God,  though  sometimes  applicable  to  the  same subject, never contemplate it in the same light. They are, indeed, as intimately connected as the reign of king William and the kingdom of Great Britain. The former represents the administration of the kingdom, and the latter the state over which this administration extends.  

Two  good  reasons  may  be  offered  why  Matthew,  the  oldest Christian writer, generally prefers Kingdom or Reign of *Heaven,* to the  phrase  Kingdom  or  Reign  of  *God:*  I  say  *generally,*  for  he occasionally uses *both* designations.14 He wrote to Jews in Judea 

who expected a Messiah, a King, and a Kingdom of God on *earth,* a mere improvement of the Jewish system; and therefore to raise their conception he delights to call it the Reign or Kingdom of *Heaven*, in contrast with that earthly Kingdom of God, of which they were so long in possession. 

He also found a good reason in the idiom of the Jewish prophets for using the word *Heaven* (both in the singular and plural form) for *God.* Daniel told the Assyrian monarch that his kingdom would be sure to him when he would have learned that "the *Heavens* do rule;" yet in the preceding verse he says, "Till thou knowest that the Most High rules in the kingdom of man," — thus using *Heavens* and  *the  Most  High*  as  synonymous.  The  Psalmist  says,  "The wicked  set  their  mouths  against  the  *Heavens.*"  The  Prodigal confesses that he had "sinned against *Heaven,*" and Jesus himself asked  whether  the  baptism  of John  was  "from  *Heaven*  or  from men." Thus he was authorized from the Jewish use of the word to regard it as equivalent to *God.* If, then, Matthew had meant no more by the phrase "Kingdom of Heaven" and the "Kingdom of God," he was justified by the Jewish use of the word *heaven,* to apply it in that sense. Some may object to all these remarks upon Matthew's manner, that it was Jesus Christ and the preachers he commissioned  who  called  it  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  and  not Matthew  Levi.  To  such  we  reply  that  the  other  sacred  writers uniformly, in reciting all the same parables and incidents, use the phrase "Kingdom of God," and *never* the phrase "the Kingdom of Heaven." 

From the use of the phrase "Kingdom of God," we must, I think, regard him as having special reference to the reason first assigned. He does not say the Kingdom of *Heaven* shall be taken from the Jews; but  "The Kingdom  of God shall  be taken from  you, and given to a nation bringing forth the fruits of it:" for although it might  with  propriety,  in  his  acceptation,  he  said  that  the  Jews already had the kingdom of God, it could not be said that they had the kingdom of *Heaven* as proclaimed by Matt. 15:1-39  

When  compared  with  the  earthly  Kingdom  of  God  among  the Jews, it is certainly the Kingdom of *Heaven;* for Jesus alleges that his kingdom is not of this world; and Daniel affirmed that in the days of the last worldly empire the God of heaven would set up a kingdom unlike all others then on earth; in which, as Paul teaches, men are "blessed with every spiritual blessing in heavenly places in Christ;"16 for he has raised us Jews and Gentiles, and "has set us down together in the heavenly places by Christ Jesus."17

There  is,  in  the  superior  and  heavenly  privileges  and  honors bestowed upon the citizens of this kingdom, the best reason why it should have first been presented to the world under this title, rather than  any  other;  and  for  the  same  reasons  which  influenced Matthew to usher it into notice in Judea, under this designation, we ought now to prefer it, because many of our contemporaries, like the ancient Jews, see as much of heaven and glory in the veiled grace of the Mosaic institution, as  in the unveiled grace of the Christian  kingdom.  The  pertinency  of  this  title  will  appear  still more evident as we develop the constitutional privileges of this kingdom. 

But  most  evidently  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  "*the  Kingdom  of Christ and of God.*"18 It is the kingdom of God, because he set it 

up,19 gave the constitution and King, and all the materials out of which it is erected.20 It is the kingdom of Christ, because God the 

Father gave it to him as his Son, and as the *heir of all things,* and therefore, "all that is the Father's is mine," says Jesus, "and I am his."21 *God created all things* **by** *Jesus Christ and* **for** *him.* 

Having, then, noticed the reasons for the characteristic *titles* of this kingdom,  and having already ascertained what  are the elements absolutely essential to a kingdom, distinguished from those merely circumstantial or accidental, we shall now proceed to consider in the order suggested, the Constitution, King, Subjects, Laws, and Territory of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

***Constitution*** 

God himself, after the gracious counsels of his own will, proposed and tendered the constitution of this kingdom to his own Son. This "glory he had with the father before the world was." He that was "in  the  beginning  with  God" — "*the  wisdom  and  power  of God*" — was set up from everlasting, or ever the earth was. "Then was  I  with  God,  as  one  brought  up  with  him;  I  was  daily  his 

delight,  rejoicing  always  before  him — rejoicing  in  the  habitable parts of his earth; and my delights were with the sons of men."22

Therefore, he who was to be "*ruler in Israel*" was with God in counsel "in the beginning of all his ways;" for "his goings forth were from of old, even from the day of eternity."23

It was **to do the will,** or fulfil the items of this constitution, that "*the* **word** was made flesh and dwelt among us." I came to *do the will* of him that *sent* me, and to finish "the work *given* me to do." "I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to resume it; this  commandment  I  received  from  my  Father."  The  Father "commissioned and sent him forth into the world." He "came down from heaven." "Thou hast given me power over all flesh, that I might give eternal life to all that thou hast given me." 

These,  and  many  other  passages,  which  the  reader  will  easily remember,  unequivocally  evince  that  an  understanding  and agreement existed ere time began between God and the **Word** of God — or,  as  now  revealed,  between  the  **Father**  and  the  **Son**, respecting the kingdom. In consequence of which, "the *Word* was made flesh and dwelt among us" — in consequence of which "he divested himself" of his antecedent glory — "took upon him the form of  a  bond-servant" — "was  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful flesh" — "took part with us in flesh and blood." In consequence of which agreement, and the promised glory, for "the joy set before him in the promise," of "seeing his seed the travail of his soul, and being satisfied," he "endured the cross, despising the shame," and was "made perfect through sufferings to lead many sons to glory." 

To  the  stipulations  concerning  eternal  life,  propounded  in  the constitution  of  the  Kingdom  of  Heaven,  frequent  allusions  are made in the Apostle's writings. Thus the believers were "elected in *him*  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,"  and  "eternal  life  was promised  before  the  times  of  the  ages,"  "according  to  the benevolent  purposes  which  *he  purposed  in  himself*  for  the administration  of  the  fulness  of  the  appointed  times,  to  gather together all under Christ — all in the heavens and all on the earth, under him. He formerly marked us out for an adoption through 

Jesus Christ to himself, according to his purpose, who effectually works all things according to the counsel of his will.24

From all these sayings and allusions, we must trace the constitution of this kingdom into eternity — before time began. We must date it from *everlasting,* and resolve it into the absolute gracious will of the eternal God. In reference to all the prospective developments of time, "known to God from the beginning," it proposed to make the **word**  flesh,  and  then  to  make  the  Incarnate  Word,  called Emmanuel, of Jesus Christ, the *King,* to give him all who should be reconciled to God by him for *subjects,* to put under him all the angelic hosts, and constitute him monarch of earth, *lawgiver* to the universe; and thus make him heir and Lord of all things. 

As a constitution brings all the elements of a kingdom into a new relation to one another, so it is the measure and guarantee of all the privileges, immunities, and obligations accruing to all the parties in that relation. It prescribes, arranges, and secures all the privileges, duties, obligations, honors, and emoluments of the King and the subjects. Neither of them can claim more than it stipulates and guarantees, and neither of them can rightfully be deprived of any of them. 

From the premises now before us, and the light given to us in these scriptures and those in the margin, we learn —  

***First**.* That God is the author of the constitution of the Kingdom of Heaven; that he propounded it to the **word** that was made flesh, before  the  world  was,  in  prospect  of  all  the  developments  of creation. 

***Second.*** That the **word** accepted it, because the will of God was always his delight; therefore he said, "I come to do thy will, O God!"  Hence  "*God*  has so  loved the world as to  give his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes on him may not perish, but obtain eternal life." 

***Third.*** That in consequence "all *authority* in heaven and earth" was given to Jesus Christ, and all orders of intelligence subjected to 

him, that he might be *King* over all, and have the power of giving eternal life to his people.25

***Fourth**.*  That  the  earth  is  now  the  Lord's,  the  present  temporal territory of his kingdom; that the heathen people are given to him for  his  inheritance,  and  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  earth  for  his possession; that all ends of the earth are his, and all dominions, kindreds, tribes, tongues, and people shall yet serve him on earth and glorify him in heaven.26

***Fifth**.* That all that he redeems are his seed — his subjects: that he will have their faith, confidence, esteem, admiration, and gratitude forever; that he will be worshipped, honored, and revered by them in a world without end: that God, angels, and saints will delight in him for ever and ever.27 He has, therefore, to raise the dead, judge the  world,  and  to  present  the  redeemed  pure,  holy,  happy,  and triumphant before his Father, and then to give up his kingdom to God. 

To  comprehend  in  any  adequate  idea,  the  constitution  of  this kingdom, we must learn more than its history, or the way in which it  was  introduced  and  propounded.  We  must  regard  all  the elements of the kingdom as *constitutional* elements — the King as constitutional King; the subjects, laws, and territory, including the ultimate  inheritance,  as  constitutional  subjects,  laws,  territory, inheritance; and, therefore, we shall speak of them in detail. 

***The King*** 

The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  the  constitutional  monarch  of  the Kingdom of Heaven. The privileges guaranteed to him in reference to the kingdom are as follows: 

As King, he is to be the *oracle* of God — to have the disposal of the Holy  Spirit — to  be  Prophet  and  High  Priest  of  the  Temple  of God — to have the throne of his Father — to be governor of all nations on  earth,  and  head  of  all  hierarchs  and  powers  in  heaven — the supreme Lawgiver, the only Savior — the resurrection and the life, the ultimate and final Judge of all, and the Heir of all things. These honors, privileges, and powers, are secured to him by the irrevocable grant of the God and Father of all; therefore, as said Isaiah, "The Lord cometh with a strong hand, and his arm shall rule for him. Behold his reward is with him, and his work before him." "I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion." "Ask of me, and  I  will  give  thee  the  heathen  for  thine  inheritance,  and  the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession." "I have made him a leader  and  commander  of  the  people" — "a  light  to  the Gentiles" — "salvation to the ends of the earth" — "a Priest forever after the order of Melchisedeck," "Sit thou at my right hand till I make thy foes thy footstool." "The government shall be upon his shoulders." "All things are delivered to me by my Father." "He is Lord of the dead and living." "Angels, authorities, and powers are subjected to him." "The Father gave the Spirit without measure to him." "He received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit." "The kingdom is the Lord's, and he is the governor among the nations." "He shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the Euphrates to the ends of the earth." "They shall fear thee as long as sun  and  moon  endure  to  all  generations."  "The  Father  has committed all judgments to the Son." 

But, not to weary the reader with quotations and proofs, we shall give but another: — "Behold my servant, whom I uphold; my elect, in whom my soul delights. I have put my Spirit upon him. He shall bring  forth  judgment  unto  truth.  He  shall  not  fail  nor  be discouraged till he have set judgment in the earth; and the Isles shall  wait  for  his  law." — "I,  the  Lord,  have  called  thee  in righteousness, and will hold thy hand and keep thee, and give thee for a *covenant* of the people, for a *light* to the Gentiles — to open the blind eyes, to bring out the prisoners from the prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prison house."28

***The Subjects of the Kingdom*** 

They  are  all  born  again.  Their  privileges  and  honors  are  the following: —  

***First**.* Their constitutional King is the only begotten Son of God; whose  titles  and  honors  are — Image  of  the  invisible God — Effulgence  of  the  Father's  glory — Emmanuel — Upholder  of the universe — Prophet of the Prophets — High Priest of the temple of God — King  of  kings — Lord  of  lords — the  only Potentate — Commander  and  Covenant  of  the  people — Captain  of Salvation — Counsellor, Lawgiver, Redeemer, Deliverer, Mediator, Savior, Advocate, Judge. He is the Sun of Righteousness, Prince of Peace,  Lamb  of God,  Lion  of the tribe of Judah, the Root  and Offspring  of  David,  the  Bright  and  Morning  Star,  Light  of  the World,  the  Faithful  and  True  Witness,  Bishop  of  Souls,  Great Shepherd of the Sheep, Head of the Church, Lord of all, Heir of the Universe, the Resurrection and the Life, the Son of Man, the Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the end, the Amen, etc. etc. Such is the  Christian's  King,  whose  assistance  in  all  these  characters, offices,  and  relations,  as  exhibited,  under  all  these  figures,  is guaranteed to him in the Constitution. Indeed it is all expressed in one promise — "*I will be your God, and you shall be my people.*" 

***Second**.* It is guaranteed that "their sins and iniquities are to be remembered no more." "There is no condemnation to them who are under Christ." "Sin shall have no dominion, nor lord it over them." The Lord imputeth to them no sin. They are all pardoned, justified, and saved from sin. 

***Third**.* They are adopted into the family of God; made sons and daughters of the Lord Almighty, children of God, and heirs — joint heirs with Christ. They have an Advocate in the heavens, through whom their persons and prayers are accepted. 

***Fourth**.* They all know the Lord. "All thy children shall be taught of God." The Holy Spirit of God writes the law of God upon their hearts, and inscribes it upon their understanding: so that they need not teach every one his fellow citizen to know the Lord, "for they all know him from the least to the greatest." They are sanctified through the truth — separated and consecrated to God. 

***Fifth**.* They have the promise of a resurrection from the dead, and eternal  life;  an  inheritance  incorruptible,  undefiled,  and unfading — new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness alone shall dwell forever. 

Such are the constitutional rights and privileges of the citizens of the  Kingdom  of  Heaven.  All  these  have  obtained  for  them  the following titles and honors: — Kingdom of Heaven; Israel of God; chosen generation; body of Christ; children of God; habitation of God; family of God; Jerusalem from above; Mount Zion; peculiar people; the elect of God; holy nation; temple of the Holy Spirit; house of God; city of the living God; pillar and ground of the truth; living stones; seed of Abraham; citizens of heaven; lights of the world; salt of the earth; heirs of God; joint heirs with Christ, etc. 

The privileges, honors, and emoluments belong to every citizen of the Kingdom of Heaven. Indeed, they are all comprehended in the summary  which  Paul  (from  Jeremiah)  lays  before  the  believing Hebrews: — "This  is  the  constitution  which  I  will  make  with  the house of Israel for those days: I will put my laws into their mind, and inscribe them upon their hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a people. And they shall not teach every man his fellow citizen, and every man his brother, saying, Know the  Lord; for all shall  know me, from  the least  of them to  the greatest  of  them;  because  I  will  be  merciful  to  their unrighteousness, and their sins and iniquities I will remember no more."29 To this summary the reader may add those scriptures in the margin, as confirmatory of the above.30

***The Laws of the Kingdom*** 

The supreme law of the kingdom is *love* — love to the King and love to each other. From this law all its religious homage and morality flow. Precepts and examples innumerable present this to the mind of all the citizens. The Kingdom of Heaven is divided into small societies, called *churches,* or *congregations of the Lord.* Each of these communities in the reception of members, in the education and discipline of them, or in excluding them when necessary, is to be governed by the apostolic instructions: for to the Apostles the Savior committed the management of his kingdom. After they had made citizens by preaching the gospel and baptizing, they were commanded to teach them to observe whatsoever the Savior had commanded them. 

These laws and usages of the Apostles must be learned from what the  Apostles  published  to  the  world,  after  the  ascension  and coronation of the King, as they are recorded in the Acts of the Apostles and Epistles: for we shall see in the sequel that the gospel was fully developed, and the whole doctrine of the Reign of Christ *began* to be proclaimed in Jerusalem, on the first Pentecost after the ascension. 

The old or Jewish constitution was promulged first on Sinai on the first  Pentecost  after  the  redemption  of  Israel  from  Egyptian bondage; and from that day, and what is written after it in Exodus and Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy, all the laws, manners, and  customs  authorized  by  the  national  constitution  are  to  be found.  They  are  not  to  be  sought  after  in  Genesis,  nor  in  the antecedent  economy.  Neither  are  the  statutes  and  laws  of  the Christian kingdom to be sought for in the Jewish scriptures, nor antecedent  to  the  day  of  Pentecost;  except  so  far  as  our  Lord himself, during his life time, propounded the doctrine of his reign. But of this when we ascertain the *commencement* of this kingdom. 

There is one universal law of naturalization, or for making citizens out of all nations, enjoined upon those citizens of the kingdom who are  engaged  in  the  work  of  proselytism;  but  the  laws  of  this kingdom, like the laws of every other kingdom, are obligatory only on the citizens. 

The weekly celebration of the death and resurrection of Jesus, and the weekly meeting of the disciples of Christ for this purpose, and for the edification of one another in their most holy faith, are the only positive statutes of the kingdom; and, therefore, there is no law, statute, or observance in this kingdom, that in the least retards its extension from East to West, from North to South, or that can prevent its progress in all nations of the world. 

It  is,  however,  worthy  of  observation,  that  every  part  of  the Christian  worship,  in  the  small  communities  spread  over  the territory of the Kingdom of Heaven, like so many candlesticks in a large edifice, are designed to enlighten and convert the world; and, therefore, in all the meetings of the family of God, they are to keep this supremely in view; and to regard themselves as the "pillar and ground of the truth." 

Concerning the details of the laws of the kingdom, we cannot now speak  particularly.  "The  favor  of  God  which  brings  salvation, teaches all the citizens of heaven, that, denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, they should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this  present  world,  expecting  the  blessed  hope — namely,  the appearing of the glory of the great God, and of our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify to himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works."  These  things  the  Bishops  of  every  community  should teach and enforce; for such is the spirit, and such is the object of all the laws and statutes of the Kingdom of Heaven. 

***The Territory of the Kingdom*** 

In all other kingdoms, except the Kingdom of Heaven, the territory is  the  national  domain  and  inheritance.  It  was  so  in  the  first Kingdom  of  God  under  the  constitution  from  Sinai.  But  in  the typical kingdom they lived at a distance from their inheritance for one generation. During these forty  years, in which they pitched their tents in the wilderness, *God was their inheritance.* He rained bread from heaven upon them, and sent them flesh upon the east wind. He made the flinty rock Horeb a living spring, whose stream followed them all the way to Jordan. He renewed their garments every day, so that for forty years they grew not old, not needed a single patch. A pillar of fire by night and a cloud by day guided them towards Canaan, the land of their inheritance. 

The whole earth is the present territory of the Kingdom of Heaven, but the new heavens and earth are to be its *inheritance.* The earth, indeed, is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof; but the children of God and the children of the wicked one — the *wheat* and the *darnel,* are both planted in it, and must grow till the harvest. The righteous have their bread and water guaranteed to them while they live; for "godliness is profitable to all things, having *promise of the life that now is,* as well as of that which is to come." But the joint heirs of Christ  are  never  taught  to  regard  the  earth  as  their  inheritance. They may indeed, say, though poor and penniless, "All things are ours; whether Paul or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come — all are ours, and we are Christ's, and Christ is God's." But, like the Jews on their journey to Canaan,  "they  seek  a  better  country" — "they  seek  a  city  yet  to come." "My kingdom," says Jesus, "is not of this world." And, therefore, in the world, Christians are strangers and pilgrims, and may expect tribulation. 

There earth is the present *theatre of war;* therefore all Christians in the territory are *soldiers.* Their expenses, their rations are allowed, the  arms  and  munitions  of  war  are  supplied  them  from  the magazines  in  Mount  Zion,  the  strong  hold  and  fortress  of  the kingdom; where the King, the heads of departments, and all the legions of angels are resident. So that on entering the Army of the Faith every soldier is panoplied with the armor of God; and when inducted into the heavenly tactics under the Captain of Salvation, he is expected to be a good soldier of Jesus Christ, and to fight the good fight of faith courageously and victoriously. 

The Kingdom of Heaven on this territory is greatly opposed by the kingdom of Satan, which ever seeks to make an *inheritance* out of the  territory  of  the  militant  kingdom  of  righteousness;  and therefore, the citizens have not to wrestle with flesh and blood, but with  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this  world — with  spiritual wickedness in high places. 

Ever since the commencement of this kingdom, the governments of this world have either been directly opposed to it, or at best, pretended friends; and therefore their influence has always been opposed to the true Spirit and genius of the Christian institution. Christians  have  nothing  to  expect  from  them  except  liberty  of conscience and protection from violence, while leading peaceable and  quiet  lives,  in  all  godliness  and  honesty,  till  Jesus  take  to himself his great power, and hurl all these potentates from their thrones and make his cause triumphant — a consummation devoutly to be wished, and which cannot now be regarded as far distant. 

***Manner and Customs of the Kingdom*** 

Touching *the manners and customs* of the Kingdom of Heaven, they are such as generally obtained in the land of Judea and in the East  at  the  time  of  its  erection:  or,  rather,  they  are  the  simple manners  and  customs  of  the  *family  worship  age*  of  the  world. These are consecrated by simply performing them with a regard to Jesus Christ, or from the motives prompted by the doctrine of the Reign of Heaven. As we treat our natural brothers and sisters in public  and  in  private — as  we  address,  salute,  and  converse  with them — as we transact all family business, and conduct the affairs of the household — so are Christians to treat one another. There is no other  virtue  or  utility  in  these,  than  as  they  cherish  brotherly kindness and love, and are regarded to the Lord. 

***Induction into the Kingdom of Heaven*** 

Into  every  kingdom,  human  or  divine,  there  is  a  legal  door  of admission. That is, in the statute book of Heaven, called a *birth.* Into  the  kingdom  of  nature  we  are  born.  Into  the  future  and ultimate kingdom of glory we enter, soul and body, by being born from the grave. As Christ, the first born from the dead, entered the heavenly  kingdom,  so  must  all  his  brethren.  And  as  to  this kingdom of which we speak, as now existing in this world, Jesus himself taught that into it no person can legally enter who is not born again, or "*born of water and the Spirit.*"31 The analogy is 

complete between the kingdoms of nature — of grace — and of glory. Hence we have natural birth, metaphorical or spiritual birth, and supernatural birth. There is a being born of the flesh — born of the Spirit — born of the grave; and there is a kingdom for the flesh — a kingdom for the Spirit — and a kingdom for the glorified man. 

This second, or new birth, which inducts into the Kingdom of God, is always subsequent to a death and burial, as it will be into the everlasting kingdom of glory. It is indeed, a literal death and burial before a literal resurrection, into the heavenly and eternal kingdom. It is also a metaphorical or figurative death and burial, before the figurative resurrection or new birth into the Kingdom of Heaven. Water  is  the  element  in  which  this  burial  and  resurrection  are performed, according to the constitutional laws of the Kingdom of Heaven.  Hence  Jesus  connects  the  water  and  the  Spirit  when speaking of entering the Kingdom of God. 

In  naturalizing  aliens,  the  commandment  of  the  King  is first — submit to them the Constitution, or preach to them *the gospel of the kingdom,* Soon as they understand and believe this, and are desirous of being translated into the Kingdom  of Christ and of God, that "they many receive the remission of sins and inheritance among all that are sanctified," they are to be buried in water into the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, and raised out of it confessing their death to sin, their faith in Christ's sacrifice and resurrection: and thus they are born of water and the Spirit, and constituted citizens of the kingdom of heaven. *To as many as thus receive him he gives privilege to become the children of God;* for they are "*born of God*" — born of *God,* when born of water and the Spirit, because this is the institution of God. 

In these days of apostasy men have sought out many inventions. Some have attempted to get into the Kingdom of Heaven without being  born  at  all.  Others  imagine  that  they  can  be  born  of  the Spirit, without water, and that the king is well pleased with them who have been born without a mother, as those who are lawfully born  of  father  and  mother.  Others  think  that  neither  Spirit  nor water is necessary; but if they are politically born of the flesh, they can  enter  the  kingdom  as  rightfully  as  the  Jewish  circumcised infants enter the earthly kingdom of Israel. But as we have no faith in any modern improvements of the gospel, change or amendment of the constitution of the Kingdom of Heaven, we must leave them to account to the King himself, who "*have transgressed the law, changed the ordinance, and broken the everlasting covenant;*"32 and proceed to the question, “When did the Kingdom of Heaven commence?” (See next essay) 

